in this issue ESSAY That Interactive Thing You Do 3 Mic we P. Peterso11 FEATURED ARTICLES Beyond Graduated Circles Varied Point Symbols for 6 Representing Quantitative Data on Maps Cy11thia A. Brewer and A11drew . Campbell Animation Based Map Design The Visual Effects of 26 Interpolatio n on the Appearance of Three Dimens ional Surfaces Steplre11 Lm1i11, So11ja Ross11111, a11d Slraw11 R. Slade Decision Making with Conflicting Cartograp hic Information 35 The Case of Groundwater Vulnerability Maps Clwr es P. Rader and f a111es O. f anke REVIEWS The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 48 Russell 5. Kirby Mapping an Empire The Geograp hical Construction of 49 British India, 1765 1843 W. Eliznbetli fepson Atlas of Oregon Wildlife Distribution , Habitat, and Natural 51 History James E. Meacl1m11 CARTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES 53 MAP LIBRARY BULLETIN BOARD 57 NACISNEWS 59 tnessages MESSAGE FROM NACIS' PRESIDENT It is a pleasure to serve as the 1997 98 president of NACIS. No, really, I am serious! as Dave Barry would say . After well over a decade of association with the organization, serving now and then as a member of the board of directors or the CP editorial board, I finally have the pleasure of serving as NACIS' vice president and now president. The words "pleasure" and "president" are seldom found together in the same sentence let me tell you why I use them together. For one thing, I get to deliver some good news to NACIS mem bers and others with links to cartography we have a new editor for Cartogrnplric PcrspectitJ es. After a two year search and several guest editors, we found our new editor, Dr. Michael Peterson of the Uni versity of Nebraska Omaha, right at the head of our own editorial conti1111ed Oil NEW NACIS WEB SITE www .nacis.org cartographic perspectives journal of the North American Cartographic Information Society Editor Dr. Miclwel P. Peterson Dept. of Geography Ceo logy Universitv of Jebraska Omaha Omaha, NE 68182 0199 402 554 4805 fax 402 554 3518 email geolib n vis.unomaha.edu Assist1111t Editor Tames R. Anderson, Jr. FREAC Florida State University Tallahassee, FL 32306 2641 850 644 2883 fax 850 644 7360 e mail jandcrso maikr.fsu.edu Hook Rcuic t' ditor Joanne M. Perry Map Librarian Information Services Oregon State University 121 Tlw Valley Library Corvallis, OR 97 Bl 4501 541 737 2971 fax 541 737 3433 perryj ccmai l .orst .ed u Cartogmpltic Tcclt11iq11c Editor James E. Meaclrnm Director, lnfoGraphics Lab Departnwnt of Geography Cnivcrsity of Oregon Eugene, OR 97403 1251 541 346 4870 fax 541 346 2067 jmeacham tiregon.uoregon.edu Cartographic Perspectives EDITORIAL BOARD Barbara Buttenfield University of Colorado Gregory Chu Univ. of Wisconsin La Crosse Jeremy Crampton George Mason University Borden Dent Georgia State University Scott Freundschuh Univ. of Minnesota Duluth Melissa Lamont Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Jim Merchant Univ. of Nebraska Lincoln Mark Monmonier Syracuse University Judy Olson Michigan State University Jeffrey Patton Univ. of N. Carolina Greensboro Joe Poracsky Portland State University Ren V asiliev State Univ. of New York College at Geneseo Matthew McGranagha11 University of Hawaii Manoa Carolyn Weiss I Statistics Canada J i !111p Library H11 lcti11 Hc111nl di or Melissa L.amont Data Libran l'vlclean I .,1boratorv Woods Hole kL anographic Institution WHO! fail Stop 8 Woods Holl', MA 02 143 508 289 3396 fax 508 457 2183 mlamont whoi.edu ISSN I 048 9085 Cartographic f'erspecti Vl'S is pub I islwd t ri an nu a 11 about the cover About the Cover The cover was designed by James Swanson using Adobe Photoshop on a Power Macintosh . James is currently finishing his master's degree at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. His thesis concerns the cartographic applications of the Virtual Reality Modeling Language VRML . VRML is the Internet standard for the description of interactive 30 objects and scenes. Across the top of the cover, a series of prism maps show the change in US income per capita from 1948 to 1970. In the lower right is a wire frame of the extruded states from the VRML map. The stripe down the middle of the page represents a binary data stream with ones and zeroes. Towards the bottom left is a portion of the source code for the I VRML map. Th.is VRML 'world' can be accessed at osprey.itd.sterling.com I vrml. J Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 3 essay That Interactive Thing You Do The incorporation of interaction in the display of maps may be viewed as a major accomplishment of the computer era in cartography. Certainly, interaction has pervaded all forms of mapping, whether it is with a database of a geographic information system, a multimedia atlas on a CD RO vt , or street maps on the World Wide Web. A characteristic shared by all of these forms of mapping is the control that the user has over the resultant map. However, interactivity is not new in cartography. In fact, it may be as old as cartography itself. While .Ve don't know when the first map was made, it was very likely a product of an interaction between two individu als. It may have been much like the "paper napkin map" of today the kind of map that is drawn on any piece of scrap paper when words fail as one tries to explain where something is located. A common characteristic of these maps is that the person for whom the map is being made will ask questions that affect how the map is drawn. For example, the person might ask where a particular landmark is located to provide a point of reference. The map becomes a product of interaction when the maker of the map includes the landmark. It is likely that the first map was a product of this type of interaction. If the first maps were interactive, what does this mean about cartogra phy now? One way to answer this is to view the progression of cartogra phy in three stages. The initial maps were interactive, perhaps drawn in sand Vith a stick. A major shift occurred long ago as a more stable me dium was used and maps were transformed into static objects, first on clay and later on paper. This was an important transition because it made the communication of spatial information possible without the mapmaker having to be present. However, it removed the interactive component. With the help of GIS, multimedia and the web, cartography, now in its third stage, is becoming interactive again. The first and third stages are both interactive, but differ in how the interaction is achieved human vs. computer. What do we call the inter vening period? In geology, the time period in which we live is commonly referred to as an "interglacial," i.e., the time between major glacial events. In a similar sense, cartography may be seen as having been in an "interinteractive" period a period when static maps were the norm. The ice is still melting from this period. The transition to interactive maps is a difficult one for those accus tomed to static representations. A "paper thinking" envelopes us. It is a type of thinking that is difficult to overcome because we have been influenced by static maps for such a long period. It is the way we think maps should be. It is the way we have come to know the world. We should remember that while we have adapted to static maps, many people have not. A large percentage of the population cannot effectively use these maps. They apparently do not find that the informati on is presented in a usable form. The one million daily hits on interactive mapping services like MapQuest are an indication that interactive maps are much more accessible to many people. While we might criticize the poor graphic quality of these maps, people seem to use them. Michael P Peterson Dept. of Geography Geology Univ. of Nebraska at Omaha Omaha, NE 68182 4 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 The Society North American Cartogaphic Information Society AGS Collection, P.O. 399 Milwaukee, WI 53201 voke 414 229 6282 voice 800 558 8993 fax 414 229 3624 cmb uwm.edu How can interactive maps be made better? A conversation is a good metaphor to use in understanding what interaction means with a map. An important aspect of a good conversation is that each participant responds in some way to what the other has said. A bad conversation is character ized by no response, a response that has nothing to do with the topic of the conversation, or does not relate to the previous point that was made. An additional and important aspect of a conversation is that each participant is building up a database of what the other has said. The database can be fairly sophisticated at times. For example, I can remember stories that people have told me several years ago although they have sometimes forgotten that they have already told me these stories a flaw in their 'who have I told this to' database . We have not reached this stage of sophistication in interactive cartography. The system rarely remembers what it has already shown. The closest we get to this is the short term caching structure of a World Wide Web browser. Viewed in the perspective of a conversation, the type of interaction that we have with maps on the computer is simplistic. It is somewhat like talking to a person for the first time over and over again. There is no database of the interaction. The computer doesn't remember anything . Because it doesn't remember, it cannot raise the sophistication of the interaction. Perhaps the conversational form of interaction with maps is not we want. Imagine if the computer responded with messages like I've made this map for you before! Don't you remember where that feature is located! Can we move to a more intelligent level of interaction , please? We apparently prefer a more shallovv form of interaction with the computer. Perhaps we want to maintain the status of a master. We cer tainly don't want the computer to challenge us as another person might do. Some computer games incorporate varying levels of sophistication. They adapt to a particular user and move them forward to more compli cated tasks with rewards along the way. This, and the very high level of interaction that characterizes these games, maintain the interest of the user. The user is made to feel part of the game. The interactive map can create the same feeling on the part of the user. How far we have come from that first interactive map? It might be said that with all of our computers and technology, we still cannot simulate the interaction in a "paper napkin" map. We may be making more accurate maps and maps that are the result of greater analytical thought, but they may not be as interactive as that first map in the sand. Contact for information concerning NACIS XVIII Program Cynthia Brewer Department of Geography 302 Walker Building Pennsylvania State Univ. University Park, PA 16802 voice 814 865 5072 fax 814 863 7943 c brewer essc .psu.edu Poster Session Donna Schenstrom Dept. of Geography Univ. of Wisconsin Milwaukee Milwaukee, WI 53201 voice 414 229 4865 fax 414 229 3981 dgs uwm.edu Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 5 XVIII ANNUAL MEETING NORTH AMERICAN CARTOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SOCIETY OCTOBER 7 10, 1998 MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN The NACIS Program Committee invites you to participate in this meeting by presenting a paper, poster or exhibit. Plan to organize a session, panel discussion, or workshop. A full range of computing facilities at the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee will be available for workshops. We look. forward to featuring the current challenges confronting map librarians and cartographers. Potential topics include 7 handling digital map library data 7 compiling metadata 7 managing the practical constraints of budgets 7 exploring data using visualization virtual reality 7 integrating diverse data sources for map production 7 marketing cartography services 7 developing educational materials We also encourage presentations that will complement the sympo sium Maps a11d Mi11ds A History of Cartography i11 Geography Ed11catio11, which has been organized by the Hermon Dunlap Smith Center for the History of Cartograp hy, lewberry Library. This symposium is co sponsored by NACIS and will be held in Milwaukee on Wednesday, October 7. To continue themes from the symposium at l' ACIS, we welcome presentations on maps in education and on cartographic education from historical, current and speculative perspectives. Challenges that reflect the practical side of this topic include production of maps for educational media and collaboration with authors. Topics on maps and society will also mesh with the symposium themes. Email your 250 word abstract or proposal to the program chair, Cynthia Brewer, by May 1. List names and affiliations of all authors, and include phone and email for the presenting author. We encour age student participation. Email proposals and abstracts to c brewer essc.ps u.ed u The deadline is May 1 Space may still be available after the deadline . Participants will be notified by June 15, 1998, of acceptance of their abstract or proposa l. 6 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Cynthia A. Brewer Department of Geography Pe11nsylz1a11ia State University U11iversity Park, PA 16802 Andrew J. Campbell Vance Air Force Base E11id, OK 73705 INTRODUCT ION " ... graduated point symbols were the most co111111on quantitative sy111boliznt io11 choice." Beyond Graduated Circles Varied Point Symbols for Representing Quantitative Data on Maps Graduated point symbols are viewed as an appropriate choice for many thematic maps of data associated with point locations. Areal quantitative data, reported by such enumeration units as countries, are frequently presented with choropleth maps but are also well suited to point symbol representations . Our objective is to provide an ordered set of examples of the many point symbol forms used on maps by showing symbols with linear, areal, and volumetric scaling on repeated small maps of the same data set. Bivariate point symbols are also demonstrated with emphasis on the distinction between symbols appropriate for comparison sepa rate symbols and those appropriate for proportional relationships segmented symbols . In this paper, the variety of point symbol use is described, organized, and encourage, as is research on these varied symbols and their multivariate forms. Much cartographic research has been conducted on apparent value scaling and perceptions of graduated point symbols. However, discussion of practical subjective elements of point symbol design and construction is limited, especially for the wide variety of point symbols for representing multivariate relationships that are now feasible with modern computing and output. The primary purpose of the paper is to suggest innovative graduated symbol designs and to examine useful combinations for comparing variables and representing proportional relationsh ips. This paper was inspired by the bivariate symbol designs of hundreds of students that have taken introductory cartography courses with Cindy Brewer at San Diego State and Penn State . These students have been creative and thoughtful in the many ways they have found to represent multivariate map data, with few choosing the old standby of graduated circles when given the flexible design capabilities of the illustration software. Although thematic atlases have long made use of a wide variety of point symbols, cartography textbooks emphasize use of graduated circles. Mersey 1996 surveyed the qualitative and quantitative point symbols used in eight recently published atlases and found that graduated point symbols were the most common quantitative symbolization choice 36 percent vi th 59 percent of 36 being circles or sectored circles . In compari son, choropleth maps were used for 24 percent of the quantitative repre sentations. Mersey notes that, despite the prevalence of point symbol mapping, choropleth maps are the mainstay of most microcomputer bascd GIS programs. All of the 13 she reviewed offered choropleth map ping, with four of the 13 not able to produce graduated symbol representa tions. Muehrcke 1996 , citing Abler 1987 , refers to choropleth mapping as "a cartographic abomination that GIS will sv iftly kill off" p. 272 and then bemoans its continued use. Although GIS has enabled production of more sophisticated representations, it has also made it easier for far more people to produce choroplet h maps as well. Cartograms and dasymetric mapping offer alternatives to choropleth mapping, but here the more popular point symbol representations will be Number 29, Winter 1998 7 examined. Point symbols are appropriate for quantitative data at point locations and for areal units. They are not affected by the physical size of enumeration units large units produce large symbols on chorople th maps and can be used to illustrate a spatial distribution while maintain ing recognizable geograph ic boundaries unlike contiguo us cartograms . Widely spaced point symbols in regions of large enumeration units such as counties of the western U.S. produce the appropriate sense of sparse data and they contrast well with dense clusters of symbols in areas of small units such as eastern U.S. counties . Thus, point symbols preserve the spatial structure of the entire map without the problems associated vv ith choropleth maps or cartograms. The paper begins with a review of literature on graduated symbols to update the reader on this long research tradition in cartography and psychology. The remainder of the paper is devoted to a description of the v iriety of symbol designs possible and the nuances in symbol designs that make them appropriate for different types of bi 'ariate map data. A wide 'ariety of symbols are illustrated with the hope that these examples .vill inspire and encourage the authors of maps and GIS displavs to produce a wider , ariety of engaging and enlightening data displays well suited to communicating and exploring their geographic information. Psychopl1ysicnl Study of Grad1wted Circles Apparent alue scaling and graduated circles ha, e received a great deal of attention from cartographic researchers. The circle was, and still is, the most widely used graduated point symbol. Flannery's 1956 and 1971 '" ork firmly established apparent value scaling as a topic of research and discussion for the cartographic community. Co' 1976 concluded that apparent 'alue sc,1ling " ... turned out to be inadequate as a remedy for the underestimation of symbol size ratios" p. 73 . His research examined legend construction and anchor effects associ ated with circle and square size estimation. He found that using a legend containing a small, mid size, and large symbol relative to the mapped data led to the most accurate estimates. His findings supported Dobson 197. , who stated "a review of psychophysical research on proportional circle symbols indicates that readers can interpolate between circle sizes but that extrapolation is quite difficult" p. 53 . Chang !977 confirmed Co,'s findings with the results of a similar study comparing size estima tion using ratio and magnitude estimation methods. Macmillan et al. 197 1 , Teghtsoonian 1965 , Maddock and Crassini 1980 , and Shortridge and Welch 1980 examined the effects of the specific wording of the request that subjects estimate circle magnitudes. The latter three e'periments were not entirely applicable to cartography because the standard for comparison needed to be remembered when estimations were made vhereas normally the "standard' ' would be simultaneously available in a map legend . . .1acmillan et al. tested the use of instructions to subjects with a standard present during estimations . They found that instructions for use of a fitting strategy improved the accuracy of subjects' size judgments. By the mid 1980s , authors became increasingly skeptical about the usefulness of apparent value scaling and shifted research away from correction by exponen t. Griffin 1985 was particularly critical of its usefulness, stating Perceptual rescaling may ha, e merits for particular types of map user, or for the generation of immediate visual impressions, though both cases remain to be proven. Such rescaling pl 1ces increased demands on LITERATURE REVIEW "Appnrrnt value scnli11g and graduated circles rnpe received a great deal of atte11tio11 fro111 cartographic researchers." 8 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 " ... 111uch psychophysical study eliminates spatial structllre from our perception of thematic figures ... " map space and, in the experimenta l context, promotes an increase in the variability of subject responses. p. 35 In analyzing intra versus inter subject variation in circle size estima tion, Griffin pointed out the ineffectiveness of apparent value scaling for increasing the estimation accuracy of subjects who performed poorly. He also noted that apparent val ue scaling impaired those subjects whose estimates were most accurate. In contrast to Griffin's results, Olson's 1975 earlier work with circle size and dot density estimation examined the interaction between apparent valu e scaling and training in the form of practice and feedback about correct answers for commentary see Will iams, 1977, and Olson, 1978 . She concluded that the combination im proves both the accuracy and dispersion of subject estimates, unlike results for either scaling or training alone. Assuming that a map legend functions as training in a limited way by providing example sizes with associated data values, apparent value scaling may produce improvement in graduated circle estimation for complete map reading contexts that is not seen in simpler experimental contexts. Interactive and animated mapping facilitates examinat ion of multiple symbol scalings. Slocum and Yoder 1996 described student use of Visual Basic to animate series of graduated circle maps. One approach was to permit interactive selection of scaling values from square root areal scaling to linear scaling of diameters , which enhanced spatial pattern by greatly exaggerating relative circle areas. Heino 1991 noted that graded rather than graduated symbols may be the best method of displaying quantitative data on a map. Heino argued that since graduated point symbols were meant as visual abstractions, graded symbols sufficient ly convey the intended message without creating the problems associated with graduated symbol perception. Dent 1996 also discussed range graded circles in his textbook. His discussion in cluded Meihoefer's 1969 ten circle sizes that were "consistently discrimi nated by his subjects" Dent, p. 174 as well as his own untested set of graded circles. Similarly, Monmonier 1977 recommended a regression based method of circle scaling intended to improve visual correlations between maps by essentially imposing a shared minimum and maximum circle size on the data representations of two or more maps to be com pared. His approach to scaling permitted accurate value estimations from legend examples, but correct size ratios between symbols were not main tained. This shift in research away from apparent scaling was supported by authors such as Worth 1989 who discussed, as Flannery had, some of the problems with approaching cartographic research as a pure science. He noted that much cartograph ic research borrows from psychology because both fields are highly subjective, and stated that, "By their very nature, experimental tests in cartography must involve many subjective decisions, and although we must do our best to apply the scientific method, subjec tivity will always be invoh ed" p. 152 . Petchenik 1983 offered an in depth discussion of cartograph ic research and the problems associated with limiting ourselves to psychophys ical study. She explained that much psychoph ysical study eliminates spatial structure from our perception of thematic figures, and quoted Chang 1980 who stated, "The stimulus response relationship for circles is fairly complex, and any correction in map design based on one psychophys ical study alone is of limited value, especially given the incomparability between the conditions of the experiment and of real map use" p. 161 . There have been calls for more cognitive research to counter the limita Number 29, Winter 1998 9 tions of psychophysical research in cartography Olson 1979 Fraczek 1984 , and Gilmartin 1981a discussed the inextricable link between cognitive and psychophysical study. Peterson 1985, 1987 examined mental images of maps and comparison of pattterns on point symbol maps, rather than comparison of symbols. MacEachren's How Maps Work 1995 is a current, in depth analysis of human cognitive processes used to understand map symbols and map patterns. Beyond Circle Size Estimation Groop and Cole 1978 studied the relative effectiveness of cut out versus overlapping graduated circles, since many graduated circle maps include dense clusters of circles. Their analysis showed that estimation errors associated with cut out circles were significantly greater than those associated vi th overlapping circles. Cut out circles are seldom used today because of the ease of constructing overlapping circles with the computer. However, Dent 1996 noted that they "add a three dimensional plastic quality to the map" p. 177 . Groop and Cole also questioned the effects of clustering on the accuracy of size estimation. Gilmartin 198lb found that circle size estimation was affected by neighboring circles and that the effect can be minimized by including intervening linework such as bound aries separating enumeration units. Dent noted the current lack of a solution to this problem. Researchers have examined the effects of both lightness and hue on symbol size estimation. Meihoefer 1973 studied the effect of transparent, gray, and black circles on size estimation with his l 969 set of graded circles. He found no differenc e in subject perception with these three fill variations. Crawford 1971 concluded that the perception of circle size was the same whether the circles were represented in black or gray. Patton and Slocum 1985 conducted a study to assess the effect that aesthetic use of color had on pattern recall of graduated circles. Lindenberg 1986 examined the effect of color on size estimation for graduated circles. Neither Patton and Slocum nor Lindenberg found differences associated with color, substantiating Meihoefer's and Crawford's studies. In contrast, Williams 1956 found small differences in size estimates between colored symbols circles, squares, triangles and black symbols of the same size, with the largest difference of six percent between equivalent yellow and black symbols. Griffin 990 recognized the increase in cognitive study of graduated symbol use, but suggested continued research using the stimulus response approach. He investigated visual contrast between graduated circles and their map background, user preference for opaque versus transparent circles, and the effect of varying circle fill color on size estimation. His subjects disliked a white fill most and showed a strong preference for black figures. Preference results for opacity depended on a subject's preference for clarity of the figure or detail of the background. As in Crawford 1971 , Meihoefer 1973 , Patton and Slocum 1985 , and Lindenberg 1986 , color variation was shmvn to have no effect on size estimation. Comparisons of Types of Graduated Symbols Unfortunately, little has been written by cartographers comparing the relative usefulness of different types of graduated point symbols. This lack stems, in part, from the historical difficulty of manually constructing graduated symbols. Graduated circles were versatile and easy to construct through both manual and automated means, and have, therefore, received greater attention. In addition, few researchers have investigated the " ... color vnrintio11 wns shown to have 110 effect 011 size estimation." 10 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "while their popularity and psychological nppeal are grudgingly ndmitted their use is 'rm insult to mnn 's intelligence'" representation of comparison and proportional relationships within multivariate graduated symbols. In 1926, Eells examined "The Relative Merits of Circles and Bars for Representing Component Parts." He noted commonly held criticisms of using circles to illustrate component parts what we refer to as propor tional relationships including difficulty in rapid and accurate estimation of values, inaccuracy of estimation due to their areal nature, and the suggestion that "while their popularity and psychological appeal are grudging ly admitted their use is 'an insult to man's intelligence'" p. 122 . However, Eells' study concluded that circle diagrams divided into compo nent parts were easily and accurately read, that accuracy increased with the number of subdivisions of circles but decreased for subdivided bars, and that the use of circle diagrams was "worthy of encouragement" p. 132 . Croxton and Stryker's 1927 follow up study supported Eells's findings and suggested that for illustrating 25, 50, and 75 percent relation ships, circles worked significantly better than bars. Croxton and Stein 1932 further examined the accuracy of size estimates using bars, squares, circles, and cubes. They concluded that scaled bars yielded more accurate results compared to area or volume symbols. Furthermore, they found that performance with both circles and squares was better than with cubes. Their study supported the commonly held belief that the fewer dimen sions a graduated symbol possesses, the more accurately its size is esti mated a general rule strongly supported by Cleveland, 1985, p. 254 . Neither Croxton's studies nor Eells' study was performed in a carto graphic context. Their results offered basic comparisons of graduated symbols without the complications of spatially registered data. Clarke 1959 examined the relative accuracy of size estimation for lines, circles, squares, spheres, and cubes. His data ere collected using three symbol sizes in each trial. Subjects were asked to estimate the sizes of the small and large symbols using a middle size symbol. Greater errors in estimations of size occurred as the number of dimensions increased and as the difference between the symbol and the standard increased. Ekman and Junge 1961 elaborated on this conclusion by generating power functions for symbol types. Flannery 1971 included examination of the relative effectiveness of wedges and bars compared to circles in his research. Although he con cluded that wedges were not estimated as accurately as circles, he noted their usefulness for showing proportions for specific locations cities, ports, and intersections, for example because the vertex naturally points to the place to which the value belongs. He also noted the relatively high accuracy of estimations with linearly scaled bars. Crawford 1973 examined perceptions of graduated squares. Specifi cally, he studied the potential for linear rather than areal estimation of square size and whether squares were correctly, under , or over estimated. His regression model clearly indicated that square sizes were estimated a really, not linearly, and he showed that square sizes were more accurately estimated than circles. Likewise , Heino 1991 recommended the use of squares and cubes, instead of circles and spheres, for accurate estimation of data sets with large ranges. In addition to comparing types of symbols, multivariate symbols would seem a logical topic of research in thematic cartography. Both MacEachren 1995 and Nelson and Gilmartin 1996 , however, note that very little of this research has been done. One theme in their reviews of the topic is the link between the design of multivariate symbols and whether symbol dimensions representing each variable remain separable or are combined in a more holistic symbol with i11tegrnl dimensions Shortridge 1982 . Nelson Number 29, Winter 1998 11 and Gilmartin examine symbols representing sets of four variables with attention to the multiple purposes of multivariate map symbols from 'what' and 'how much' at the local level which may be better represented with separable dimensio ns to regional patterns and correlations between variables which may be better represented with integral dimension s . As an example of multivari ate symbol research, Slocum 1981 exam ined two sectored pie graphs. Specifically, he measured the just noticeable difference for sector size and accuracy of sector size estimation. He found that subjects could not discriminate between sector size differences of less than nine degrees, and that sector sizes were estimated within a three percent margin of error. He suggested rounding data to the nearest five percent, rather than one percent, before drawing sectors. His study was, in part, a response to Balogun 1978 , who suggested the use of decagraphs ten sided polygons for representing proportions. Examples of decagraph use can be found in the Atlas c f Ncufo1111dla 11d a11d La 1rador, where they are used to represent economic data McManus et al. 1991, plates 10 and 19 . Point Symbol Discussion in Cartographic Textbooks Cnrtosrnphy Tlre111atic Map Design by Dent 1996 and Elements of Cartog raphy by Robinson et al. 1995 are two widely used collegiate texts. Chapter 8 of Dent's book offers a concise survey of the research that has been conducted over the past twenty fi, e years, including apparent .scaling Flannery 1971 , effects of symbol clustering on size perception Gilmartin L98lb , anchor effects Cox 1976 , range grading Meihoefer 1969 , and open and cut out circles Groop and Cole J978 . Dent also directs attention to multivariate graduated point symbols, the use of graduated qua res and triangles, and the use of volumetric symbols. Robinson et al. briefly discuss the use of variations in symbol shape and orientation to represent classes of graded data. They offer an in depth discussion of graduated circle use in representing univariate data with the addition of a color sequence for a second map variable. Their coverage of multivariate mapping is divided into four types, in their words superim position of features different symbols , segmented symbols sectored pie graphs , cross va riable mapping bivariate choropleth , and composite indexes cartographic modeling . They warn students that "supermaps" illustrating too many variables often hinder the clear communication intended by the mapmaker. Issues for Future Research Point symbol maps may be designed with multiple objectives, such as encourging accurate symbol size estimation, easing legend matching, attracting attention, representing patterns across a map, and showing spatial relationships between , ariables. Success for one design objective often necessitates failure for competing objectives Petchenik 1983 , though interacti, e environments that encourage multiple representations improve on this discouraging reality. Further experimental testing and other investigations should be structured to account for the multiple tasks for which maps are designed. Examples of competing objectives can be found for varied aspects of point symbol mapping, such as range grading, symbol dimensionality, map comparison, and multivariate symbols. The literature reveals a tension between accurate estimation of indi 'idual svmbols and the alternati e of range graded symbols, for which data values are classed and assigned to ordered but arbitrarily scaled symbol sizes. Range graded symbols are selected to be obviously different in size and easily identified in a legend. A hybrid approach with symbols scaled to means of data "Further experimental testing and other i11vestigatio11s s'1011ld be structured to account for the multiple tasks for which maps are designed." 12 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "A hybrid approach with symbols scaled to means of data classes, for example, 111ay be a useful compromise ... " GRADUATED POINT SYMBOL EXAMPLES AND SOURCES OF INI 'OV A TION classes, for example, may be a useful compromise between the comfort of easy identification and an accurate overview of relative magnitudes across a map. Similarly, low symbol dimensionality improves symbol size estimation but may hinder map pattern interpretation. The larger range in sizes of linearly sca led symbols bars, for example causes symbols to extend farther across the map than higher dimension and more compact symbol forms areal and volumetric symbols such as squares or cubes representing the same data. Adjustments within a map series, such as equalizing symbol areas among maps before comparison Peterson 1985 or using constant symbol sizes for minimum and maximum data values Monmonier 1977 , assist pattern comparison but interfere with compari son of data magnitudes between maps. Another challenge is choice of multivariate mappings with separable symbol dimensions which may encourage comparisons within symbols and within variables versus integral dimensions which may improve understanding of patterns in correlations between variables . Although researching the endless variety of multivariate point symbols is a daunting prospect, it would be useful to see work on how people use and understand these types of representa tions. The next sections summarize many possibilities for point symbol mapping. In addition to the theoretical research issues that are reviewed , interest in these symbols also invites practical research on how point symbols can be effectively implemented in mapping, GIS, and visualiza tion software environments. Figures 2 through 8 illustrate both common and innovative ways to illustrate quantitative univariate and bivariate data with graduated point symbols, and Figure lb presents a choropleth version of the map for comparison. In addition to univariate representations, this discussion concentrates on basic ways of representing proportional and comparison relationships on bivariate maps. These terms require some explanation. 'Proportional ' data refers to relationships in which one data set is part of the other data set being mapped. Similarly, Eells 1926 referred to repre senting proportional relationships as illustrating component parts. 'Com parison' data refers to those data that are two separate measures but the relationship between them correlation is of interest. One data set is not a part of the other. The data on loan disbursements that was used for the maps in this paper, for example, may be divided into public and private proportions or it may be co111pared to principal repayments for the same year. Our mapped data Table 1 were taken from a World Bank report 1994 . The same data are mapped in each of the figures to aid comparison of the symbol types, though the small extent of the maps does not foster regional comparisons and does not allow evaluation of the symbols with more numerous enumeration units. All data are for countries in northern South America. Point symbols are used for country data in these maps to emphasize that point symbols are appropriate for areal data, even though some authors restrict their representations to choropleth mapping Figure 1 b . All data are for 1993 debt levels total loan disbursements, principal repayments, and the proportions of total disbursements for public versus private loans. Table 1 notes provide further explanation of the variables. Univariate Data Total 1993 Disbursements Figures 1 through 4 illustrate a variety of methods for mapping univariate data. Figure la lists disbursement values as an areal table. Figure lb is a choropleth map of these data, which is shown for compari Number 29, Winter 1998 13 a. Areal Table VENEZUELA 1993 2137 Disbursements GUYANA 69 Disbursements COLOMB IA mapped are the 1697 amount of each country's 1993 debt flow that is drawn on loan commitments. ECUADOR Reported in millions 662 of U.S. dollars I BRAZIL 12195 Source PERU World Bank 1994 1551 Fi 11n 1. Are,1l t,1blc a , d1ornplcth b , ,111d haded quarc c representation of 111,111 di'iburscment dat,1. The many point symbol' dc'icribcd in th1s paper arc allcrnati c t 1 the flawed reprcscn t,1tion . in a and b. Number.., ,1 d11 not provide ,1 vi' ual rL'prL' ... entation of re la ti e magn1tudt'' 11t data alues. Thl' ..,1 e' ot the gray fil , of thl' choropleth m.1p b ilrl' controlled by the si C'i nf the cnuntril'' ratl1L'r th,111 the data alu. ' Cnuntr siLl' ha! a large visual impact nn tlw data rcprc'" 'ntal1on but it i' not dircctlv related to the ecom mlC 'ariablc ot 111terc .t. h1r this rca5on, Cil1 tngr.1phc r . gl'nerally admoni! h ,1g.1in .1 rq rc,enting total value with a choroplcth map. Shaded point svmbob ol a onstnn t ,i L', such a' squares c , arl' one way of rcnw ing the effect 11f enumer,1tion un1I i l' 1111 a grn,v ca lc . 'mb11li ation Countrv Loan Principal Disbursements Repayme nts" Brazil 12195 6212 Colombia 1697 2083 Ecuador 66 2 488 Guvana 69 46 Peru 1551 1007 Venezuela 2137 1515 .oh_.., Disbursements to Public Entities' 3265 15 t? . 97 69 1. 92 1877 All d,11,1 .ire t11r 199 ,111d arc rq ortcd 111 milho1v .. ol L.S. d1,ll.ir,. Till' d,1t,1 source io a 199 1 nrld B.111l . pubh. at1on titk'd l ' 11 d De it T,1 lc . I l.'111t1l 1111111 1' 1, r Oci'l' 1 1'111 c litJI!r r . . . ,1 rrn t" L11,111 di,bur,c nwnh ML dl'tined ,,, .. dr.i 111g' tln lnan commilml'nh during till' 'ear 'pec1hl'd .. p. r . h un ' I thr11ugh I , io ' uni ',1ri,1te m.1ps 1 1 di,bur l' nh.'nt . l'rincip,1! rep.n men I' .ire .. the amounts 1 t principal amorti ation paid in foreign currenc '. good,, or 'L'n ILL'' 111 tllL' yc'M 'PL'Cihl'd .. p. i' . f'rincip.11 rc p,11 ml'llh are compared 111 loan d1sbur,c mc nh 111 Figure' 6 ,111d 7,i. Di,bur,L'lll .'lll' to public l'nllt1e' .ire e'tc rn,111 bh ,1t1111b ot public 1lc btm,, .. including the nal11lll,1I 11 L'rn111e11t. .i political subd1 'i. 1nn or an agl'nC ' Pt c ithc r . ,1nJ ,1uton1llllll h public bPd11 ' p 1 ' .The rc nia1111kr ot lo.in' Ml' lo pri ale debtor' 'ho .ire not gu.ir.1nll'L' f b pul,h, l'lllil1c,. l'ul'llC ,111d pri ate di,bur'L'lllt'lll' arc till' pn1portio11 . ot tot.ii d1,bur,l'mc 111, m.1pped in F1 ure, 7h .111d . b. Choropleth D 69 662 1551 2137 12195 c.Shaded Squares J 1 69 662 1551 2137 12195 14 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 . '._, a. Graduated . 1 .. Numbers ' 2 .1 ?' Disbursements ' .01 in Billions of U.S. Dollars 1.7 .1 b. Graduated Circles 100 500 e 0 E ''1.6112.2 5.0 5000 II I ,, I . ! ' I c. Graduated Squares 100 500 II 5000 e. Grid Squares 100 500 5000 ' d. Graduated Ellipses 100 500 f. Graduated Pictograms 100 500 F1s11rc 2. Areal univariate point symbols representing 1993 loan disbursement data graduated numbers a , graduated circles b , graduated squares c , graduated ellipses d , grid squares e , and graduated pictograms f . Data values are in millions of U.S. dollars, except for Figure 2a which shows billions of U.S. dollars see Table 1 for description of mapped data . Symbols arc sized to data values using square root son but is not a recommended representation for these total dollar values. Figure 1c is a variation on the gray scale representation of the choropleth map, with the gray fills applied to a repeated square symbol of constant size. This variation removes the unwanted effects of variation in enumera tion unit size, though differences in lightness are more difficult to compare than differences in symbol area Cleveland 1985, p. 254 . Pazner 1997 proposed a similar representation with constant size squares that he termed "tile maps." Size and lightness may also be used as redundant symbolizations each representing the same data values within symbols , and lightness may be used to map a second variable within a graduated Number 29, Winter 1998 15 , I .. _ a. Graduated ,!. Bars .. ... I ' t ' I I , ' I ,,,, I 100 500 5000 b. Graduated Spikes ! ' I l ,,,,, ... 100 500 5000 c. Repeated s Pictograms c f.. " t .. s f.. .,, t t __ .. t . c t ' " ' r t ,,. t t t c f.. c r r .. r .. r t J , r Figure 3. Lim .u uni' ariate point symbols representing 1993 loan er 't r disbursement d it i gr iduated bars a graduated pike , formed . . r r r 100 500 5000 by triangles with a constant base and height5 lincarlv scaled to '", , data b and st ick' of repeated pictogram c . symbol. These valid variations are not pursued because this paper has been limited to a manageable set of possibilities by focusing primarily on graduated symbol forms. Like Figure la, Figure 2a is an areal table with the siLes of numbers graduated by their values. Graduated numbers offer the reader the accu racy of a table with the advantage of a visual representation of relative magnitudes. T 'ote that Figure 2a is the only map with symbols that represent debt in billions of dollars Figure la and all other map legends list debt in millions of dollars. Traditional graduated circles and squares also work well with the disbursements data set Figure 2b and c . Their familiarity and versatility make them mapping options that should not be overlooked. By sizing the height and width of the entire set of symbols by a constant ratio, gradu ated ellipses Figure 2d offer a mapping solution for sets of enumeration "Graduated m11nbers offer tile reader tile accuracy of a table with the advantage of a 7.'isual represe11tatio11 of relative 111ng11 i t11des." 16 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 a. Graduated Spheres 100 500 b. Graduated Cubes 100 c. Block Piles 100 Fi 11n .f. 'olurnctric univariate point symbols reprc,enting 1993 loan disbursement d it,i graduated spheres ii , grnduated cubes b , and bl CI . piles c . Cube root scaling is used to sLi c the spheres and cubes, 111d block piles are constrnctt d by repeating the smallest cube symbol. units having generally elongated shapes. These ellipses are also included for comparison to a later bivariate use Figure 6g . Magnitudes represented with a square grid Figure 2e may aid accurate interpretation because individual cells can be counted. Another areal symbol, the 'money bag' picto gram Figure 2f offers an example shape that more literally reflects the data, captures the reader's attention, and may be scaled to represent relative quantities. Pictograms are particularly well suited when 'catching' the reader's eye is a priority, making them common in magazines , newspapers , and educational material. The New Stnte of the World Atlns Kidron and Segal 1984 offers good examples of the unlimited possibilitie s of pictogram use. This atlas and later editions for example, the fifth edition was published in 1995 use graded pictogram s to cleverly illustrate everything from radio receivers per 1000 people to worker exploitation rates. An example similar to that used in Figure 2f can be found in the Atlns of Newfo1111dln11d n11d Labrador McManus et al. 1991, pl. 19 . Although pictograms may not be well suited for accurate magnitude estimation, variety and ability to match the theme of the data being mapped make them a worthwhile consideration. Linearly scaled symbols Figure 3 work well for these data because of the relatively large enumeration units. The bars in Figure 3a overlap multiple enumeration units and may be difficult to associate with the correct location. In contrast, the larger bases of the spikes in Figure 3b better associate the symbols with their enumeration units. Stacks of repeated pictograms Figure 3c offer a linearly scaled version of pictograms a similar pictogram is areally scaled in Figure 2 . Alternatively, scaling the height of a single tall pictogram for each enumeration unit is also appropriate. For mapping phenomena such as mercury in sediments, makers of The Nntionnl Atlas of Sweden The Em iro11111e11t Bernes and Grundsten 1992 use linearly scaled graduated columns set on an oblique perspective projection of Sweden viewed from the east. This technique produces an interesting map and allows the uncluttered us e of linearly scaled bars that would be stacked atop one another in a more traditional planimetric view oriented to the north. Finally, volumetric symbols such as cubes and spheres Figures 4a and b are used for data with an extreme range and are relatively easy to con struct. Spheres can be rendered using a circle with a radial fill and a shadow Figure 4a . Cube construction is more challenging because of projection options Mackay 1953 Ekman et al. Number 29, Winter 1998 17 1961 Brewer 1982 Dubery and Willats 1983 Figure 5 . Block piles Figure le have long been associated with Raisz's talent for cartographic symbolization 1939, 19 !8 . Co111pnriso11 Dntn Disb11rse111e11ts n11d Pri11cipal Repnyments The possibilities for comparing data with point symbols on bi 'CHiate maps are limitless. The focus will be on several combinations of circles and squares, as well as bars, ellipses, and cubes. The large number of arrangement options available using common graduated circles and squares side by side or m crlayed offer different visual impressions while illustrating the same data Figure 6a, b, d, and f . Overlapping the symbols produces a more integral symbol that involves pattern recogni tion because differences in relative values produce different overall symbol forms compare the mostly black symbol for Colombia, which is the only country for which payments exceed disbursements, to the others . Combining shapes for two qualitati 'cly different variables, such as graduated circles and squares Figure 6f , increases the variation in overall symbol form , but makes relative sizes difficult to compare. There are many options beyond combinations of circles and squares for comparing data. Adjacent semicircles Figure 6c clearly illustrate differences between the two data sets. How C 'er, the adjacent straight edges may lead to linear rather than are,1 based estimates of value differences. Estimates of differ ences between pairs of linear symbols arc easier to make, although graduate d bars Figure 6e can be more 'curnbcrso me' because linear ca ling increases the range of the map covered by symbols square root scaling for areal symbols and cube root scaling for volumetric symbols produce more compact hapes . One student Jeff Erickson offered a creative combination for pairing graduated cubes Figure 7a . Cubes may also be placed ' ide by side or stacked. An example of using pictograms to illustrate comparison data can be found in Thomas's Tl1ird Vorld Alla 199 l . He used a split textbook to illustrate "Gross primary school enrollment ratio" p. 59 bet 'een males and females. The left side of the book was linearly scalt.?d to the percentage of male enrollment the right side to female enroll ment. Ellipses Figure 6g may be constructed with their axes scaled to illustrate different sets of data, in this case disbursement on the horizontal axis and principa l repi1yments on the vertical. V1,KEi1chren 1993, p. 90 describes this combination as an integration of attributes merged into one symbol. He cites Garner 1976 when stating "that object integration is more likely to lead to integral or configural conjunction than will two distinct ' patially contiguous objects e.g., pc1ired bars on a bar chart " p. 90 . The axes of these ellipses were SCi1lcd using the linear dimcn ions of the bars in Figure 6e. When ellipses are highly elongated in one direction or the other, the reader will rccogni e ' patial patterns in ariablc differences by the orienta tion of the symbols' major axes. Ellipses with more circular hapes repre ent comparisons for which neither of the mi1pped values arc significantly larger than the other. Ra! e 1987 included bi ariate ellipses in his point symbol mapping soft ware. Orthographic D1cm 1 cm Oblique example s cavalier 1 4 11 LlJ. usual cabinet H 71 LJ 45 usual Axonometr ic examples shape and area of orthographic view maintained angles sum to 90 Isometric all scales same Perspective one point perspective A LJ 70 Elaborations di metric two scales same tnmetnc three scales ditterent Elaborations two point perspective two vanishing points three point perspective three vanishing points 1 111, .i. A ,,1mpling ot thl' m,rny 'ay' of dra'' mg thrl'e d1111l'11,u111,1l ,ymbol,, u'ing at ern cubl to dem lht r.11, tlw l'lfoct' of variou' rrn1L' l1Pn ,,.,ll'm' Duben ,md 11lat' 1981 . Tlw cubl pn 1edi 11' L 1wr,1ll ' 111crea'l' in snplw. tic,1l1 lll trom thl' l 'P do 'n in thi . figure'. " "' 18 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 I i ' ' . a. Adjacent Graduated Squares Pnncpal D sbursements Payments 111100 11500 c. Adjacent Graduated Semicircles soot t 500 5000 e. Adjacent Graduated Bars 0 s0ursemel'lts Pr napa Payments 100 500 5000 g. Ellipses with Graduated Axes Disbursements on Horizonta l Axis Principal Payments on Vertical Axis 5000 ' I " .7 ' , ' ''"' ,.... t, .........., b. Graduated Square Overlay Pnncipal Dlsbursemen ls Pavments 100. 11 soo d. Graduated Circle Overlay PnncipaJ Payments 100. 9soo 5000 . f. Graduated Circle Square Overlay .........,_ Pnnopa1 0 sbursements Payments 100 e 500 II Figure 6. Areal and linear bivariate point symbols for data compari son. Related variables, 1993 disbursements and principal repayments, are compared on each map. ote that payments exceed disburse ments for Colombia. Thus, a representation of repayments as a proportion of disbursements a circle segment for example would be quite awkward from both practical and logical perspectives. Example comparison symbols are adjacent graduated squares a , graduated square overlay b , adjacent areally scaled graduated semicircles c , graduated circle overlay d , adjacent graduated bars e , graduated circle and square overlay f , and ellipses with graduated axes g . Ellipse axes in g are linearly scaled to two data values to produce both varied shapes and sizes, though symbol areas are not directly scaled to a mapped variable. The overall look of the overlay symbols b, d, and f change markedly dependin g on which variable is the larger of the two. Overlay symbol construction is awkward where amounts are near equal because symbols are almost the same size but the slightly smaller one will take visual precedence note Guyana's gray symbol . Number 29, Winter 1998 19 a. Nested Cubes Pr nc1pa D soursements Pl lmtn! 'I I I ''1 b. Graduated Segmented Cubes F1.x1m 7 ,lumetnc bivariate point .,ymbols for both comparison il and proportional b rl'iallonships, The same dat,1 represented in Figure' 6 and 8 are u.,ed for the cube in 7a and b rc pcctively, Proportional Data Public and Private Components of Disbursements Mapping proportional data differs substantially from mapping com parison data because the smaller of the two data sets is always part of the larger set, unlike the disbursement and repayment data used in the comparison examples Figure 6 and 7a . In Figures 7b and Sa, c, e, and g, graduated symbols are scaled to represent total disbursements and are segmented by the proportions of loans to public and private entities. Symbols of constant size in Figures Sb, d, and fare segmented to represent only the proportions of the disbursements ' compositions , not the total disbursement value as the graduated symbols do so they are akin to univariate symbols. In all cases, the black portions of each symbol repre sent disbursements to public entities and the gray portions to private. For example, the use of graduated segmented circles Figure Se allows the map reader to compare the total value of disbursements among countries as well as the proportions of private and public disbursements. In contrast, maintaining a constant symbol size Figure Sf focuses the reader's atten tion on the proportional relationship. Examples of sectored circles and wedges Fig Se, f. and g are found in a variety of sources including Historical Atlas of Cminda, Vol. Jll Kerr and Holdsworth 1990 , The l atio11nl Atlas of Sweden The E1ri.'iro11111e11t Bernes and Grundsten 1992 , and Tire MnritilJle Provinces Atlas McCalla 19SS . The Historicnl Atlas of Canada makes extensive use of sectored circles, and often uses the space surrounding the map to allow extreme symbol sizing. Wedges, often used in The National Atlas of Sweden, are particularly well suited for illustrating quantitative data associated with points like ports or cities p. 97 for example . Wedges can easily be rotated to fit in where other 'bulky' symbols can not easily be associated with a point location. The graduated wedge radius represents the total symbol size without showing the entire circle from which the segment came Figure Sg . The wedge's point anchors it to its enumeration unit the opposite association is used for graduated spikes Figure 3b . The MnritilJle Prot i11ces Atlas uses a grouping of four wedges set at ninety degrees, like four flower petals. Each wedge represents the amount of a particular type of overnight accommo dation across the region. The reader may either compare entire symbol structures or individual segments of each symbol. The segmented bars and squares were constructed with fifty percent markers Figure Sa, b, c, and d . Students often included these reference "In contrast, maintaining a constant symbol size Figure Bf focuses the reader's attention 011 the proportio11al relationship." 20 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 I f " ,, . .. ' ' ' I , I ' _, a. Graduated Segmente d Bars Private Public 100 500 5000 c. Graduated Segmented Squares 100 500 II e. Graduated Segmented Circles 100 500 Private Public g. Graduated Wedges Percent Private ' 4 25 . ?S ,, .. ___...,__ I I' '""' .. .. I , ... .. b. Segmented Bars Percent of 1993 Loan Disbursements to Private Debtors Percent of 1993 Loan Disburse ments to Public Entities d. Segmented Squares Percent Private 50 Percent Public f. Segmented Circles Percent Private Percent Public Figure 8. Linear and areal bivariate point symbols for a proportional data relationship public and private disbursements are proportions of total 1993 disbursements. Example proportion representations are graduated segmented bars a , segmented bars of constant size b , graduated segmented squares c , segmented squares d , graduated segmented circles c , segmented circles f , and graduated wedges g . Figures b, d, and f how only the proportions of private and public disbur ement and not the total amounts of disbursements, which are shown in a, c, and e. Figure g shows only the portion of private disbursements as circle sectors, or wedges, with an indication of the total disbursement graduated circles in the square root scaled sector radii. Number 29, Winter 1998 21 points in their symbol designs, which assists accurate percentag e esti mates. The symbol form in Figure 8b is known to statisticians as a framed rectangle Cleveland 1985, p. 208 Dunn 1987, 1988 , and Monmonier 1993, p. 65 describes its usefulness in representing both absolute magni tudes and intensities. Dunn 1987 also suggests scaling the widths of the rectangles to total data values to total disbursements for Figure 8b . In a conversation about Figure 8, MacEachren mentioned a successful student project from an ACSM design competition that divided graduated squares into ten by ten grids such that each cell represented one percent, and each row ten percent, of the whole for all symbol sizes rather than using grid cells of a fixed size a hybrid of Figure 8c and 2e . The work of students new to cartography has been an inspiration. With modern computing at their disposal and freedom from the conventions of traditional thematic mapping , students are producin g a wide variety of creative symbols for mapping data usually symbolized by graduated circles or squares. For example, a recent student assignment with eco nomic data produced creative ideas ranging from a proportionally scaled ilonopoly game character with pockets turned out or clutching money bags to weight scales drawn tipped to illustrate balances between dollar amounts by Elliott Westerman and Erika Bozza respectively . Are these effective symbols? With so little research into multivar iate representations, one can not say, but this type of experimentation can be encouraged until there is e idence to the contrarv. The intent of this paper has been to review some of the major topics on which graduated symbol research has been conducted and to demonstrate the wide variety of ways to map univariat e data as well as bivariate comparison and proportional relationships. The survey vas not exhaus tive, but if it has inspired recall of other symbol forms that have been missed, then it has been successful in provoking consideration of the wide range of possibilities available vith point symbols. Modern computer mapping allows mapmakers greater flexibility in designing creative graduated point symbols. This increase in flexibility increases the impor tance of research examining symbol design issues. As this article has illustrated, there are wide ranging possibilities for applying creative, eye catching symbol designs to summarize and synthesize quantitative spatial distributions. Comments on the manuscript by Judy Olson and by an anonymous reviewer are acknowledged with appreciation. This research was funded by a George H. Deike Jr. Research Grant from the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences at Penn State. Abler, R.F. 1987. The Jational Science Foundation National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis. 1Htcmatio11a 011mal of Geograpl1ical 11for111atiou Syste111s 1 4 303 326. Balogun, 0. . 1978. The decagraph A substitute for the pie graph? T ie Cartograplric journal 15 48 85. Bernes, C., and C. Grundsten eds. . 1992. Tire Natio11a A tins uf Swede11 The E1wiro11111e11t, vol. 4. Stockholm SNA. CONCLUSION " ... there are wide ranging possibilities for applyi11g creative, eye catching symbol designs to summarize mid synthesize quantitative spatial distributions." ACKl 'OWLEDGMEl 'TS REFEREl 'CES 22 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Brewer, C. 1982. The Effectiveness of the Cube as a Map Symbol. Unpublished Undergrad uate Thesis, Department of Geograph y, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario. Chang, K.T. 1977. Visual estimation of graduated circles. The Canadian Cartographer 14 2 130 138. Chang, K.T. 1980. Circle size judgment and map design. The American Cartographer 7 2 155 162. Clarke, J.I. 1959. Statistical map reading. Geography 44 96 104. Cleveland , W.S. 1985. The Elements of Graphing Data. Monterey , CA Wadsworth. Cox, C.W. 1976. Anchor effects and the estimation of graduated circles and squares. The American Cartographer 3 1 65 74. Crawford, P. V. 1971. Perception of grey tone symbols. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 3 1 721 735. Crawford, P.V. 1973. The perception of graduated squares as cartographic symbols. The Cartographic foumal 10 2 85 88. Croxton, F.E., and R.E. Stryker. 1927. Bar charts versus circle diagrams. Journal of the American Statistical Association 22 473 482. Croxton, F.E., and H. Stein. 1932. Graphic comparisons by bars, squares, circles, and cubes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 27 54 60. Dent, B.D. 1996. Cartography Thematic Map Design, 4th ed. Dubuque, IA Wm. C. Brown. Dobson, M.W. 1974. Refining legend values for proportional circle maps. The Ca11adia11Cartographer 11 1 45 53. Dubery, F., and . Willa ts, 1983. Perspective mid Other Drawing Systems. New York Van Nostrand Reinhold. Dunn, R. 1987. Variable width framed rectangle charts for statistical mapping. The A111ericm1 Statistician 41 2 153 156. Dunn, R. 1988. Framed rectangle charts for statistical maps with shading An experiment in graphica l perception. Tile American Statistician 42 2 123 129. Eells, W.C. 1926. The relative merits of circles and bars for representing component parts. Journal of the American Statistical Association 21 119 132. Ekman, G., and K. Junge. 1961. Psychophysical relations in visual percep tion of length, area, and volume. Scandinavian journal of Psychology 2 1 10. Ekman, G., R. Lindman , and W. William Ol sson. 1961. A psychophysical study of cartographic symbols. Perceptual and Motor Skills 13 355 368. Number 29, Winter 1998 23 Flannery, J.J. 1956. The Graduated Circle A Descriptio11 , Analysis and Evalua tion of a Q11a11titativc Map Symbol. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Depart ment of Geography , University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. Flannery, J.J. 1971. The relative effectiveness of some common graduated point symbols in the presentation of quantitative data. Tire Canadian Cartograplrer 8 2 96 109. Fraczek, I. 1984. Cartographic studies on graduated symbol map percep tion. llltematio11al Yearbook of Cartography 24 75 84. Garner, W.R. 1976. Interaction of stimulus dimensions in concept and choice processes. Cognitive Psychology 8 98 123. Gilmartin, P.P. 1981a. The interface of cognitive and psychophysical research in cartography. Cartographicn 18 3 9 20. Gilmartin, P.P. 1981b. Influences of map context on circle perception. Annals of tire Association of A111erican Geographers 71 2 253 258. Griffin, T.L.C. 1985. Group and individual variations in judgment and their relevance to the scaling of graduated circles. Cartographicn 22 1 21 37. Griffin, T.L.C. 1990. The importance of visual contrast for graduated circles. Cartography 19 1 21 30. Groop, R.E., and D. Cole. 1978. Overlapping graduated circles Magnitude estirnabon and method of portrayal. The Canadian Cartographer 15 2 114 122. Heino, A. 1991. The estimation of graduated symbols in thematic maps. Fe1rnia 169 2 171 181. Kerr, D., and D.W. Holdsworth eds . 1990. Historical Atlas of Canada, Vol. III, Addressing the Twentieth Century, 1891 1961. Toronto University of Toronto Press. Kidron, M. and R. Segal. 1984. The New State of the World Atlas. New York Simon Schuster. Lindenberg, R.E. 1986. The Effect of Color 011 Q11a11titative Map Symbol Estimatio11 . Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS. MacEachren, A.M. 1995. How Maps Work Representation, Vis11a izatio11 , and Design. New York Guilford. Mackay, J.R. 1953. A new projection for cubic symbols on economic maps. Econo111ic Geograplry 29 60 62. Macmillan, N.A., CF. Moschetto, F.M. Bialostozky, and L. Engel. 1974. Size judgment The presence of a standard increases the exponent of the power law. Perceptio11 and Psychophysics, 16 2 340 346. Maddock, K.W., and B. Crassini. 1980. Can estimation of circle size be influenced by instructions? Cartography 11 3 175 180. 24 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 McCalla, R.J. 1988. Tl1e Maritime Provi11ces Atlas. Halifax, N.S. Maritext. McManus, G.E., C.H. Wood, D. . Mercer, and CM. Conway. 1991. Atlas of Neufo11ndla11d and Labrador. St. John's, F Breakwater. Meihoefer , H.J. 1969. The utility of the circle as an effective cartographic symbol, The Cniwdia 11 Cartogrnp hcr 6 2 105 117. Meihoefer, H.J. 1973. The visual perception of the circle in thematic maps Experimental results. The Ca11adia11Car tographer10 1 63 84. Mersey, J.E. 1996. Cartographic symbolization requirements for microcom puter based geographic information systems. Ch. 13 in Cartographic Design Tlreoreticnl ni1d Practical Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller eds . New York John Wiley Sons. 157 175. Monmonier, M.S. 1977. Regression based scaling to facilitate the cross correlation of graduated circle maps. The Cartograplric 01mwl 14 2 89 98. Monmonier, M. 1993. Mapping lt Out. Chicago University of Chicago Press. Muehrcke, P.C. 1996. The logic of map design. Ch. 19 in Cartographic Design Tlieoreficnl and Practical Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller eds . New York John Wiley Sons. 271 278. Nelson, E.S., and P. Gilmartin. 1996. An evaluation of multivariat e, quantitative point symbols for maps, Ch. 15 in Cartograpl1ic Design Theo retical and Practical Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller eds . New York John Wiley Sons. 191 210. Olson, J.M. 1975. Experience and the improvement of cartographic com munication. The Cartograpliic founwl 12 2 94 108. Olson, .YI. 1978. Graduated circles. Tire Cartographic oumal 15 2 105. Olson, J.M. 1979. Cognitive cartographic experimentation. Tile Ca11adia11 Cartograpl1er 16 1 34 44. Patton, J.C., and T.A. Slocum. 1985. Spatial pattern recall I An analysis of the aesthetic use of color. Cartographicn 22 3 70 87. Pazner, . 1.l. 1997. The tile map A table I map hybrid representation in image form. Proceedings , International Symposium on Computer Mapping in Epidemiology and Environmental Health, February 1995 published April 1997 , pp. 105 11 l. Petchenik , B.B. 1983. A map maker's perspective on map design research 1950 1980. Ch. 3 in Graplric Co111m1111icntion a11d Desig11 in Co11temporary Cartography , D.R.F. Taylor ed. , e'v York john Wiley Sons. 37 68. Peterson, M.P. 1985. Evaluating a map's image. Tire American Cartographer 12 1 41 55. Peterson, M.P. 1987. The mental image in cartographic communication . The Cartograpliic f 011 mal 24 1 35 41. Number 29, Winter 1998 25 Raisz, E. 1939. Block pile system of statistical maps. Eco110111ic Geography 15 185 188. Raisz, E. 19.f8. Gc11crnl Cartography, New York McGraw Hill. Rase, W.D. 1987. The evolution of a graduated symbol software package in a changing graphicsenvironment. nternationa fo11mal ofGeogrnpl1icn lnfor111atio11Systems1 1 51 65. Robinson, A.H., J.L. Morrison, P.C. Muehrcke, A.J. Kimerling, and S.C. Guptill. 1995. Elr111c11ts of Cartogrnphy, 6th ed. New York John Wiley Sons. Shortridge, B.G. 1982. Stimulus processing models from psychology Can ,.ve use them in cartography? The A111cricn11Cartographer9 155 167. Shortridge, B.G., and R.B. Welch. 1980. Are we asking the right questions? Comment on instructions in cartographic psychophysical studies. The A111cricn11 Cartographer 7 19 23. Slocum, T.A. 1981. Analyzing the communicative efficiency of two sectored pie graphs. Cartogrnpliicn 18 3 53 65. Slocum, T.A., and S.C. Yoder. 1996. Software for exploring te111pornl data associated l'itl1 poi11t locnlio11s. Unpublis hed presentation at the annual meeting of the North American Cartograph ic Information Society in San Antonio. October. Teghtsoonian, M. 1965. The judgment of size. T 1c A111cricn11 fo11ma of Psyclrology 78 392 402. Thomas, A. 1994. Third !Vorld Atlas, 211d ed. Washington D.C. Taylor Francis. Williams, R.L. 1956. Slatislicnl Sy111 70 s for Maps Their Design and Rclatin Values. r e,.., Haven, CT Map Laboratory, Yale University. Office of Naval Research Project JR 088 006, Nonr 609 03 . A illiams, R.L. 1977. Graduated circles. T11c Cartogrnphic 011mal 14 2 80. World Bank. 1994. World DlN Ta 1 es 1994 95, Extemal Fi11a11cefor Dl'l1elop i11g Co1111trics , of. 2. Washington D.C. The World Bank. Worth, C. 1989. Problems vi th experimental research in map design A case study. The Cartographi c fo11rnal 26 2 148 153. 26 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Stephen Lavin Sonja Rossum Shawn R. Slade Department of Geography University of Nebraska Lincoln, NE 68588 0135 KEYWORDS INTRODUCT ION Animation Based Map Design The Visual Effects of Interpolation on the Appearance of Three Dimensional Surfaces Computer animation is a potential aid in map design, because it pro vides a means for quickly reviewing many design alternatives. This research is a conceptual exploration of one aspect of animation based design The effect of inverse distance weighting on the visualization of three dimensional maps. The primary variable examined is the inversedistance weighting exponent. Changing the exponent in small intervals allows the creation of a series of three dimensional maps that can be assembled, and played back as a frame animation . In this proce dure, cartographers can view the visual effects of various exponents on the resulting surfaces. Design based animations allow mapmakers to visualize effects of their decisions in advance of map production and to make more informed design decisions . It is suggested that this method can be expanded to examine map design for a great many forms of cartographic symbology. Ideally, automatic frame generation and a graphic user interface should become an integral part of the develop ment of these visualizations. Animation, cartography, map, interpolation, inve rse distance weighting, map design, three dimensional maps, visualization. The mapping of continuous geographic phenomena in three dimensions presents a significant challenge to the design oriented cartographer. The challenge is a consequence of the variety and interplay of design decisions which, in various combinations, can radically alter the appear ance of a map, and because of the greater than usual difficulty map users have in interpretin g three dimensional maps Rowles 1978, Jenks and Crawford 1971 . Continuous spatial data is either measured or derived at control points, which, to a degree, are representa tive of the phenomena. In many cases, mathematical interpolation is then used to create a more extensive network of data values from which a visual depiction can be subsequently generated. The look of the surface is heavily dependent on choices made during interpolation , and these choices are numerous, including grid size and shape, search methods, and interpolation equa tions Golden Software 1990 . Depending on the interpolation methods selected and the parameters used in the interpolation algorithm, the resulting maps may give very different impressions of a single geographic data set. Another set of design decisions are encountered following interpola tion. These are decisions involving the visual orientation of the three dimensional surface. These decisions deal more directly with visual map attributes, and for that reason, are more predictable in their visual mani festations than those involving interpolation. Figure 1 shows a variety of options including surface rotation, angle of view from the horizon, and vertical exaggeration, as well as a number of other controls that affect the eventual look of the surface. Although these choices can also profoundly influence map appearance, their effects are somewhat easier to anticipate than those involving the mathematical equations of interpolation. For Number 29, Winter 1998 27 Vertical Angle. An angle of 90 degrees Vertical Exaggeration . A value of zero would places the viewer directly above the surface show a totally flat surface. F1 1111' I. Ori 'llf11 io11 rnrin les i11 tlnl'c dm1 1 11 i m nl mnpp111s example, it is easier to envision what viii happen to a surface if the angle of 'iew above the horizon is changed from 30 to 50 degrees than it is to predict the , isual effects of changing the inverse distance weighting exponent from one to three. Consequently, this research is concerned with the more difficult case of visualizing the effects of interpolation decisions. While it is true that contemporary three dimensional surface producing software allows experimentation with the effects of design choices on map appearance, this is usually accomplished one map at a time and normally requires many iterations before a satisfactory map is created. For example, SURFER Golden Software 1990 , a popular isoline and three dimensional mapping program for Windows DOS based computers, permits the creation of one surface at a time, and does not give the user the capability to view a number of different surfaces in rapid succession. It is difficult and time consuming to compare the visual results of design alternatives , and this hampers the cartographer's ability to identify the most appropri ate selections for representing data and communicating accurate and useful visualizat ions of geographic data. Animations are potentially , aluable aids in selecting optimum ways of designing three dimensional maps, representing data, and gaining a more complete understanding of geographic data through exploration of varying interpolation options. Furthermore, many other types of carto graphic symbols can be explored using similar methods. Although our 2ao0 Horizontal Rotation. A rotation angle of 360 degreesplaces the viewer due east of the surface. "A11i111atio11s are potentially valuable aids in selecting opti mum wnys of designing three di111e11sio11al maps, representing data, a11d gni11i11g a more com plete 1111dersta11ding of geo graphic data through explora tion of rnrying interpolation options." 28 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "Clearly, ani111atio11 e11ables mapmakers a11d map users alike, to perceive differe11ces which may otherwise go undetected whe11 viewi11g a series of static maps, perhaps even the same 111aps that compose the animation." "Ani111atio11 adds a dimension to map interpretation and analysis that the viewing of individual static maps can not provide, just as the experie11ce of viewing a motion pictures is quite different fro111 looki11g at a sequence of i11dividual stills from the same fi 111." focus is just one aspect of three dimensi onal mapping, it is not unreason able to assume that animation can be used to explore variations in unit value in dot mapping , or the visual effect of varying isoline intervals, for example. Visualization Geographic visualization is an act of cognition through which mental images of geographic data which have no visual form are developed Peterson 1995, MacEac hren 1995 . This notion of visualization can be extended to the realm of computer cartograp hy in which data stored in computer memory can be displayed visually. Cartograph ic visualization of geographic data can facilitate examinat ion and explanation of processes which evolve over time, over space, or a combination of both Campbe ll and Egbert 1990 . It is also a concept which focuses on the exploration of data rather than data presentation. As such, cartograph ic visualizat ions created with exploratory data analysis in mind are generated as animation sequences used to identify trends and relationships in the data. This identification which may or may not be observed in a non visual setting, prompts new understanding of research problems or real world applica tions MacEachren and Ganter 1990 . In our study map animation is used to construct a sequence of maps created by incrementing the weighting exponent in the inverse distance equation. Visual differences between adjacent maps in the sequence may at first seem negligible, but examination of a lengthy animation sequence reveals pronounced variations as the weighting exponent increases. Clearly, animation enables mapmakers and map users alike, to perceive differences which may otherwise go undetected when viewing a series of static maps, perhaps even the same maps that compose the animatio n. Animation adds a dimension to map interpretation and analysis that the viewing of individual static maps can not provide, just as the experience of viewing a motion pictures is quite different from looking at a sequence of individual stills from the same film. This study is restricted to developing a case study whereby a sequence of three dimensional surfaces is produced in which visual differences betvveen surfaces are a result of small variations in the weighting value used in the inverse distance weighting interpolat ion algorithm. Addition ally, the method of control point search in interpolation was varied in one instance in order to provide a slightly different perspective to animation based design in three dimens ional mapping. The sequence of changes in surface smoothness revealed by the animation allows map designers to visualize and compare the effects of changing variables in the creation of three dimensional surfaces. Continuous Surface Interpolation Interpolation of continuous geographic data for the purpose of three dimensional mapping provides estimates of data values for geographic attributes, such as precipitat ion and temperature, at unsampled grid points within the area of existing control points. The rationale behind all interpolation is that points close together in space are more likely to have similar values than points further apart Monmon ier 1982 . Rather than drawing boundaries and generalizing the area around known control points as homogeneous, interpolation is used to model the expected variation of values within an area Burrough 1986 . Interpolated values are then used to generate a visual surface representative of the continuous nature of the phenomena being mapped. Number 29, Winter 1998 29 The challenge of interpolation is to choose a technique which creates a plausible model of the variation between control points. Selection of the most appropriate method depends on the type of data used, the amount of computationa l time available, and the degree of accuracy required Lam 1983 , although this last factor is difficult to anticipate in advance. A wide variety of algorithms have been developed for point interpolation. For example, surfaces constructed by kriging, minimum curvature , and inverse distance weighting interpolations are shown in Figure 2. As can be seen, variations in interpolation method can produce pronounced visual differences. Kriging is a regional variable theory technique that assumes an underlying linear variogram, and because of this it can pro duce an estimate of error associated with an interpolation Burrough 1986, Sampson 1975 . Minimum curvature keeps the grid surface fixed at known control points while iteratively applying an algorithm to smooth the grid ded surface. Its primary benefit is that the resulting surface is constrained to pass through all control points Golden Software 1990 . Other interpola tion methods include splines, polynomials, Fourier Series, Power Series Trend, and distance weighted least squares Lam 1983 . Each technique hils a different way of modeling the variation between control points and produces a map surface with a distinctive appearance. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to address benefits and liabilities of each interpolation method, consideration of these factors is an im portant cartographic endeavor, and the reader is referred to an excellent summary of interpolation methods written by Burrough s 1986, pp. 147 166 . Inverse distance weighting, the interpolation model used herein, was selected for several reasons. Inverse distance weighting is a relatively simple technique , and due to its simplicity and availability in existing computer mapping software, is commonly used. Widespread application of this technique in cartography makes it a reasonable selection for demon strating its visual manifestations. The general advantages of using inverse di tance weighting are that computation time is minimal, and the algo rithm is relatively easy to understand Burrough 1986 . This last point will be discussed later in the section of this paper dealing with the detailed interpretation of changes seen in the maps due to variations in the interpo lation weighting. Most commonly, inverse di stance weighting is a type of moving average computation in which intermediat e point values are calculated as an average 'alue of a local neighborhood or 'windm v' Burrough 1986 . Thb aspect is also referred to as 'piecewise ' because only a portion of the control points are used to calculate grid values, although all control points arc c ometimes used in interpolation Lam 1983 . By limiting the number of control points selected, local anomalies of the data can be represented without affecting the interpolation of other points on the surface Burrough 1986 . However , an inverse distance weighting technique that encompasses all control points can be used to create a more generalized and smoother surface. Because observations close together tend to be more alike than distant observations, distance between control points is a key element in the model. The contribution of each control point to the local average is based on its distance from the grid location. Distance is incorporated into the inn rsc distance Veighting equation as the quantity d, as shown in cquntion 1. The equation calculates a new data value Z11ew for each grid intersection J on the interpolated surface. The last variable to be dis cussed, Jnd the most important to this research because its visual effect can be observed in the animations produced, is the weighting exponent 1ul J. As the weighting exponent increases , the influence of nearby points Inverse Distance Weighting weighting 2 Kriging Minimum Curvature Fig11l"I' . ?. Fn1m 'i 's of" rnr111 1 111 111 tlirce di111c11,1c 1111 'ill rl " 'S rcs11 f111g frp111 f 1rec diftl r 'lll 111lt'r l 'illlio11 111cflw1I . 011111 lllllJ'pt d 11re f ltal 11 11. 995 'r1 Lip1tal1c 11.f 11 1 'ebmskr1. 30 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "Maps thus generated can be played back as a frame by frame animation , and the effects of differences in the weighting exponent can be observed." I Zi d vt I l d.wt l Equation 1. 11verse Distance Weighting Eq11atio11 where Z z value d distance wt weighting value on the local average also increases while the influence of more distant points decreases . Emphasi zing nearby points creates more peaks and valleys in the surface in contrast to the smoother appearance resulting from the use of a low weighting exponent which gives distant points more numerical equity in the computation. A single set of data values located at control point s can be subjected to inverse distance weighting interpolation and then, by incrementally in creasing or decreasing the weighting exponent in small numerical steps, a sequence of maps showing weighting exponent effects on visual surfaces can be generated. Maps thus generated can be played back as a frame by frame animation, and the effects of differences in the weighting exponent can be observed. This can be done for either isoline or three dimensional maps, but only three dimensional maps are used in this research. The mapmaker , after a thorough examination of the animation , can then choose the map deemed most appropriate for the mapping purpose at hand, or the model or theory being examined . This type of visualization through animation can serve as a map design tool whose utility extends well beyond visualization of weighting exponent effects and into numer ous other arenas of map design, in ways that Peterson first explored in his sequencing experiments with choropleth maps Peterson 1993 . Constructing the Animations Data for the animations was acquired from weather stations across the state of Nebraska. A total of seventy stations were used. At each of these control points locations shown in Figure 3 , precipitation for the month of July, 1995 was recorded. Animation frames were created in SURFER, v 4.5 Golden Software 1990 , and then imported into Animator Pro, v 1.2 Autodesk, Inc. 1991 for playback. Figure 4 shows a selection of frames from two of the animations that were eventually constructed . Control points used in the animation were selected because these climate stations have fairly uniform spacing throughout the mapped area. Inverse distance weighting interpolation is easily affected by non uniform 3.14 1.74 1.9 3.98 188 1.8 4.35 1.57 1.47 2 61 0.93 1 24 2.95 1.4 2.56 1.4 2.99 2.05 2.34 087 2.28 138 1.63 2 25 47 146 1.33 I 69 095 1.1 I 333 2.35 0.97 201 o.9 1.58 2.21 0 74 1.03 I 53 1.87 229 0.8 2.22 1.46 .89 1 71 2.17 1.16 2.26 2.65 2.34 214 2 01 2.53 2 75 2.64 1.9 1.47 335. 2 13 3 25 5.64 1 1.59 3.n 26 I 7 212 Figure 3. Location of co11trol points and associated total 11 y, 1995 precipitation values for the maps. Number 29, Winter 1998 31 WT 1 WT 1 WT 2 WT 2 WT 3 WT 3 WT 4 WT 4 WT 5 WT 5 WT 6 WT 6 METHOD ALL METHOD NORMAL Figure 4. Frames scle tcd from a11i11111lio11 . A11i111atio11s inpr a Iola vf120 fr11111e . The method ,.de,.red lo as ALL 11'.'cs ali co11trol poi11I alue, i11 iim rs, disfm1cc i ig1ttii1g . The mctlrvd rcfa,wl to as NOR.lvlAL 11 es a rcgii 11al selecf1011Lfco11trol17vi11ts based 011 a sclecf1,111of11ear 11eighl ors. . Tis f 1e weigl1liJ1S 'Xi'OJICl f. distributions of control points because equal weights are assigned to each point even if it is in a cluster Lam 1983 . In reality, the mapmaker does not ahvays have control over the locations of control points, but for the purposes of this study it .Vas desirable to avoid the effects of uneven or clustered arrangements. One long standing, useful, and often violated convention in graphics and cartography maintains that the selection of symbols for maps and graphs should reflect the nature of data to be mapped Tufte 1983, "One long standing, useful, and often violated convention in graphics and cartography maintains that the selection of symbols for maps and graphs should reflect the nature of data to be mapped." 32 cartograplzic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "Weigh ting expo11e11 ts greater thn 11 Jou r produced su rfnces that appear to be identical. It was also observed that vertical relief i11creases as weighting expo 11e11ts increase because increas ingly greater weights are ap plied to fewer control points. This occurs regardless of control point search and selection methods. " Robinson and Petchenik 1976, Dobson 1973 . When studying the effects of inverse distance weighting in three dimensional animations, continuous data is most appropriate for visualization. Precipitation is a truly continu ous geographic phenomena, and for that reason was chosen for anima tions in this study. Individual animation frames maps were constructed in SURFER by entering control point x, y locations, and corresponding z values precipi tation for the seventy climate stations, and then computing the inverse distance grid interpolation . For each successive frame, the weighting exponent was increased by a value of 0.05. This fairly small increment was chosen to produce a smoother animation, and one which lasted a sufficient length of time to allow examination of the visual effect of increasing weights. An attempt to utilize an increment of 0.1 was made but rejected because the animation appeared too discontinuous and jumpy between successive frames. Weighting exponents ranged from 0 .05 to 6, stopping at 6 because higher weights produced little change in the three dimen sional surface. This exponent range and numerical increment yielded a total of 120 frames. Most visual parameters were set and remained constant throughout production of individual frames for each animation. In order to examine the visual effect of other interpolation settings, some of these settings were varied between animations. Uniform vertical scaling was used in all animations, and was selected by first displaying the surface with the greatest vertical relief wt 6 , adjusting the vertical scalar until no clipping of the surface at the edge of the screen occurred, observing the numerical index of the vertical scalar in this case, an index of 1.5 , and then setting all subsequent frames to that index value. Angle of view from the horizon and horizontal rotation of the surfaces were set, and also remained con stant throughout the animations. Angle of view was set at 45 degrees above the horizon, and horizontal rotation at 235 degrees 0 being a view due west . For the precipitation data used in this study, this orientation was chosen because it was the best for revealing the peaks, valleys, and spatial trends of this rather complex surface, while it also minimized hidden surfaces. Once initial settings were determined, individual frames were produced and screen captured to GIF file format at 640 by 480 resolution. Frames were then imported into Animator Pro for playback. Two variations of the animations are shown in Figure 4. Settings, as described above, are the same for each animation the only variation is in the way control points were searched for and selected for interpolation. METHOD ALL indicates that all control points were used to derive the interpolated surfaces, but they were still subjected to inverse distance weighting. METHOD NORMAL indicates that the number of control points was restricted to a set number of neighboring control points within a specified radius. One can observe that the animation produced as ALL has slightly smoother surfaces when lower weighting exponents are used. However, the surfaces rapidly become similar as weighting exponents increase. Further experiments with other search settings revealed the same trend. Weighting exponents greater than four produced surfaces that appear to be identical. It was also observed that vertical relief increases as weighting exponents increase because increasingly greater weights are applied to fewer control points. This occurs regardless of control point search and selection methods. These observations are indicative, but not exhaustive of the utility of this sort of visualization, and the conclusions derived from our observa tions would have been difficult to arrive at by any other means. Selection of individual maps to be representative of an animation series will ulti Number 29, Winter 1998 33 mately be determined by the author's purpose and goal, statistical consid erations, the intended audience , and the author's knowledge of the geographic phenomena being mapped. In this regard, design oriented animations can assist authors in making more informed map selections. Animation assisted map design is a promising tool for cartography, and can be extended Nell beyond animation of the visual effect of inverse distance weighting on three dimensional mapping. Virtually all variables encountered in designing and constructing three dimensional surfaces can be animated, including data search procedures used in gridding, surface rotation, vertical scaling, and horizontal angle of view. The greatest potential for this method lies in examining design decisions whose conse quences are difficult to visualize mentally , such as those dealing with the mathematics of grid interpolation. Jn a further example of related uses of animation, Figure 5 shows frames from an animation in which only the density of the interpolated grid is varied. Mapmakers can examine this animation to determine an appropriate level of grid based generalization for the final product. The first frame top shm.vs a surface that is made from a grid that b loo coarse to give an adequate impression of a continu ous surface, while the last frame's surface is made from a grid so fine that line svmbols coalesce and obliterate portions of the surface. The animation shows that neither of these two choices, nor some of the other frames, would be appropriat e. Hmvever , the actual selection of a surface must be made in consort with the purpose of the map, the mapmaker's intentions , and statistical guidelines, such as the error generated by interpolation. Animation based design is not limited to examination of three dimen sional surfaces, and could just as easily be employed in examining design variables in isoline, choropleth, dot, and graduated symbol mapping , as well as other forms of symbolization, DiBiase et al.1992 . fn order to become a truly useful design tool, creation of frames for animations should be automated , and the means for selecting variables for animations should be interactive and employ a graphic user interface GUI . Automat ed map generation is desirable because the construction of animations manually, one frame at a time, is a costly and time consuming process. Unless animations can be produced automatically by interfacing a geographic data base vvith map construction software , animation based design is not likely to be widely employed by cartograph ers. Availability of automated animation would provide a means to quickly construct and playback animations , make design decisions , and if a single map is de sired, to produce the most appropriate map for display or publication. The addition of interactivity and graphic user interfaces to auto an.imation software gi es even greater utility to animation based design and e .ploratory data analysis as well Peterson 1995, Lodding 1983 . The interface should permit users to make design decisions by selecting data interpolation method design elements , either singly or in combination , to be varied through animation legend structure and other ancillary map elements and the number of frames. It should then render the animation and permit playback. The interface should allow the user to change animation speed, reverse the animation, pause and resume, and possibly to query the numerical geographic data base. Finally, the interface should permit the user to record their selections and produce a final map. In order for animation to become a robust means for design based visualization, it is essential that these capabilities be repeatable . When this occurs, cartog raphy will be closer to utility in the use of animation in map design and data exploration . CONCLUSION X 20 X 40 X 60 X 80 X 100 X 120 X 140 F . 11rc 5. Frames o clt'cted from 1111 111111111111011 d11d1 l'ill"lf de11 itu of tl1t i11tap1 alt'd gn.t lt 'IU ! i11 cr .. , d1. ta 1c i.Peiglrl111g. Tlic H cisl1ti11... , .1po11t 111 i 2. X n er, lo t 1 ' 111111tl11 r ol nd i11lch ctit 11s 011 tl1c lwri o11tal a.1is. 34 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 REFERENCES Autodesk, Inc. 1991. Animator Pro. Version 1.2. Sausalito, CA. Burrough, P.A. 1986. Principles of Geographical Information Systems for Land Resource Assessment. Oxford Clarendon Press. 147 165. Campbell, CS. and Egbert, S.L. 1990. Animated Cartography Thirty Years of Scratching the Surface. Cartographica 27 2 24 46. Di Biase, D.,MacEachren, AM., Krygier, J.B., and Reeves, C. 1992. Anima tion and the Role of Map Design in Scientific Visualization. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems 19 4 201 214. Dobson, ifichael. 1973. Choropleth Maps Without Class Intervals? Geo graphic Analysis 3 358 360. Golden Software, Inc. 1990. Surfer. Version 4.15, Golden, CO. Jenks, George and Crawford, Paul. 1971. Viewing Points for Three Dimen sional Mapping. Technical Report NR389 146 , Office of Naval Research. Washington, D.C. Lam, Nina Siu Ngan. 1983. Spatial Interpolation Methods A Review. The American Cartograp her 10 2 129 149. Ladding, Karl. 1983. Iconic Interfacing. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 3 2 11 20. MacEachren, Allan. 1995. How Maps Work Representation, Visualization, and Design, New York The Guilford Press. MacEachren, Allan and Ganter, J. 1990. A Pattern Identification Approach to Cartographic Visualization. Cartographica 27 2 64 81. Monmonier, Mark. 1982. Computer Assisted Cartography Principles and Prospects, Englewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice Hal l. Peterson, Michael. 1993. Interactive Cartographic Animation. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems 20 1 40 44. Peterson, Michael. 1995. Interactive and Animated Cartography. Englewood Cliff, NJ Prentice Hall. Robinson, Arthur and Petchenik, Barbara. 1976. The Nature of Maps Essays Toward Understanding of Maps and Mapping. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. Rowles, Ruth A. 1978. Perception of Perspective Block Diagrams. The American Cartographer 5 1 31 44. Sampson, Robert. 1979. Surface III Graphics System. Lawrence, KS Kansas Geological Survey. Tufte, Edward. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT The Graphic Press. Number 29, Winter 1998 35 Decision Making with Conflicting Cartographic Information The Case of Groundwater Vulnerability Maps Conflicting cartographic information can cause problems when used to support planning decisions. Creation of conflictin g information is becoming more common as geographic visualization and modeling software are used to develop multiple maps that represent different views of the same data. This paper presents groundw ater vulnerability mapping as an example of information conflicts of this type. Three different vulnerability models applied to the same test data produced radically different results. This information was presented to a group of local planners to examine how they would deal with the conflicts. Through this exercise it became apparent that each planner used highly individual criteria to evaluate the results from the models. A continuum of strategies describes the range of responses from aspatial to spatial approaches. Jung's theory of psychological types is applied to further understand variation in responses. A venues for further research are suggested in the representation of cartographic information conflicts, the role of psychological types in decision making with maps, and the role of group dynamics in decision making with maps. Conflicting visual information in cartographic representations is a potential problem in all map displays and geographic analyses. The use of multiple representations for both display and analysis has become common practice with the widespread use of geographic visualization and analysis software e.g., geographic information systems GIS . These software products aid in the generation of many different views of one data set, the comparison of different data sets, the use of different methods for processing data, and the construction of different analytical models. The use of these tools for purposes of visualization provides a context through vhich many additional insights about a topic may be gained. In this paper, the question of conflicting information in cartographic displays is pursued in order to assess variations in map use strategies and interpretations when information is contradictory. This issue became apparent during a project that investigated the use of GIS for implement ing three different groundwater vulnerability models from the same data set Rader and Janke, 1995 . Different representations of groundwater vulnerability effectively illustrate the use of multiple views as suggested by Tufte 1990 , Muehrcke 1990 , and Monmonier 1991 , since maps produced with these models supposedly represent 'similar' information. However, the maps see Figure 1. are quite dissimilar, and the conclusions derived from their use may be contradictory. Visual information conflicts such as these may be common to many GIS analyses. Maps produced from groundwater vulnerability assessments are a primary information source employed by decision makers in developing landuse policy. Decision makers often have neither the original data nor the knowledge to assess the validity of the different models. In many cases, decision makers fail to distinguish between the maps and the models that they represent. With increased use of GIS and modeling techniques, multiple maps representing 'similar' information will likely be available and produce informati on conflicts for decision makers. Ulti mately, knowledge about how people resolve problems with conflicting Charles P. Rader Department of Geography Univ. of Wisconsin River Falls James D. Janke Department of Community Resource Development Univ. of Wisconsin Extension INTRODUCTION "In many cases, decision makers Jail to distinguish between the maps and the models that they represent." 36 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 " ... wlrat happens when map users are presen fed with con flicting or co11 trad ictory infor mation?" visual information should provide strategies for improving both carto graphic displays and users' interpretations of these displays. To examine this question, a map use exercise based on maps from different groundwa ter vulnerability models was presented to a group of local planners, elected officials, and groundwater specialists. The first part of this paper describes the vulnerability models, the context for their use, and a more formal problem statement. An overview of the map use exercise and the results are then presented . Finally, issues pertaining to the strategies that decision makers employ for dealing with visual information conflicts are discussed. In approaching this study, it is hoped that concrete recommendations can be provided on how to resolve information conflicts between maps. However , the participants' disparate responses indicated that the fundamental role of maps in decision making was at issue and that diverse approaches to problems of conflicting information were in operation. Parallels with Jung's psychological typol ogy are drawn upon to help understand variations in decision making strategies. Finally, avenues for further research are suggested. Conflicti ng Visual Information in Cartographic Representation and Planning The potential for conflicting cartographic representations appears in several ways. The desirability of multiple maps for purposes of visualiza tion has been documented by several authors. Tufte 1990 noted that small multiple maps are well suited for time series data Monmonier 1991 suggested that multiple views of a geographic data set are more truthful i.e., ethical because they provide a comparative frame of refer ence and Muehrcke 1990, 9 observed that a more thorough understand ing may be obtained by using several different maps created from the same set of data. However, while additional insights may be generated through multiple views, visual information conflicts may arise if views display contradictory information. The question that should be asked is, what happens when map users are presented with conflicting or contra dictory information? Little work has addressed the problem of conflicting visual information between multiple cartographic displays. Typically, cartographic studies have examined map similarity and pattern comparison Olson 1972, Monmonier 1974, Lloyd and Steinke 1976, Peterson 1985, and MacEachren and Ganter 1990 . These studies have examined perceived relationships between several maps, impacts of map complexity, and map similarity. While these have provided a background for understanding the perceptual characteristics of map displays, the question of conflicts in information content between several maps remains. This becomes increasingly impor tant in geographic information processing technologies where multiple displays may be produced from the same data set. For example, different views may be accomplished through changes in classing and symboliza tion schemes or the combination of multiple layers in overlay analysis. Wood 1992, 186 suggests that presenting multiple "relationships constituted by the interplay of the data" is a desirable artifact of the mapping process. Muehrcke 1990 has extended this discussion to include the idea of "map stability." Map stability refers to whether or not changes in the way data are processed or symbolized have an impact on the message perceived. However, what happens when views directly conflict with one another? While seeing small differences in representations illustrates the impact of cartographic methods on displays, seeing large differences may call into question both cartographic and modeling meth ods and possibly their ultimate utility. Number 29, Winter 1998 37 Planning involves the design and consideration of a series of alterna tives. Monmonier 1991 reviewed the use of maps in zoning and environ mental protection. Ylaps serve as tools for making planning decisions and communicating a plan's spatial implication s. In DiBiase's 1990 con tinuum of visual thinking and visual communication, planning maps operate in both the private and public realms. The maps are used in planning policy decisions, essentially a thinking task, and in presenting planning policy decisions, essentially a communication task. In this context, the power of maps to persuade should not be overlooked Harley 1989, Wood 1992 . The 'official' nature of maps often operates at a subcon scious level. Monmonier 1991, 71 notes that "without maps, planning would be chaotic, furthermore even with maps, many would argue that planning is chaotic." In addition, he comments that errors in map compilation can be significant and that the same information is often used to develop differ ent plans Monmo nier 1991 . Pla1ming scenarios often involve creating different conceptual models about a future reality. Different scenarios can often produce markedly different results. The 'stability' of results may be re framed with the concept of 'model stability.' Model stability describes how representations change through the use of different models for combining data layers that were processed using the same cartographic methods. This is a case common to many GIS analyses that employ different conceptual models for describing a process. While individual data layers may have high map stability, the final maps made from different models may be unstable. The inherent stability or instability of the models may influence how decisions are made with different maps. The implementation of different models therefore has the potential to produce information conflicts. Conflicting information is a major source of chaos in the planning process. Groundwater Vulnerability An Example Maps that result from groundwater vulnerability models provide an apt example of potential cartographic information conflicts in planning. Beginning in the early 1970s, a variety of vulnerability models were developed in response to environmental concerns about drinking water. Significant health effects from drinking contaminated water have been documented these include cancers Armijo 1981 Lee and Nielsen 1987 Canter 1987 , blue baby disease Lukens 1987 , and central nervous system birth defects Scragg et al. 1982 . By the mid 1980s, it became apparent that planning and management tools were needed to identify places that have high vulnerability to contamination Aller et al. l 985 . Several types of models have been developed to assess vulnerability. These models can be grouped into four major categories hydrogeologic setting models, parameter weighting scoring models, empirical models, and simulation models Geraghty Miller, Inc. and ICF, Inc. 1990 . Hydrogcologic setting models use qualitative site based assessme nts to rank the relative vulnerability of different areas with varying geomorphic, geological, and ground water characteristics. Parameter weighting I scoring models numerically rank and '"reight susceptibility factors and calculate relative vulnerability scores for areas with different hydrogeologic charac teristics. IVeights are often assigned to account for variations in the relative importance of factors in particular situations, e.g., areas with thin soil. Empirical models use data that relate knO Vn occurrences of contami nants in groundwate r to hydrogeologic characteristics through the applica tion of leaching models or statistical inference. Finally, simulation models attempt to predict contaminant leaching through interactions beho leen "While individual data layers may luwe high map stability, the fi11al 111aps made from different models may be unstable." 38 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 "The basic problem is that eue11 when using a common data set processed in the same Wat , the results are vastly different." hydrogeologic characteristics and contaminant fate, such as dilution, breakdovvn, absorption, and volatilization Geraghty Miller, Inc. and ICF, Inc. 1990, 6 1 . . 1ost of the models that have been applied in the context of GIS have been hydrogeologic setting or parameter weighting scoring models. DRASTIC Aller et al. 1987 is a general purpose, parameter weighting model that was developed for the US EPA for vulnerability assessments at county and state levels. Several other models have been developed for state wide assessments, including the Wisconsin Susceptibility Model WISM Schmidt 1987 , which uses weighted hydrogeologic characteris tics to model vulnerability, and an aquifer vulnerability model of Michigan Lusch et al. 1992 , which uses hydrogeologic characteristics for determin ing relative risk. All of these models use a combinat ion of data layers that include soil, subsurface geomorphic characteristics, geology, recharge rates, and topography. Little research has addressed differences in model performa nce. The authors of the models often state that results from different models are not directly comparable Aller et. al 1985 Schmidt 1987 . Furthermore, Mer chant 1994 notes that there is little validation of these models in the context of GIS and that there are a number of questions concerning the impact GIS processing methods have on model performa nce. Rader and Janke 1995 implemented several models popular in Wisconsin to address the question of model differences. In applying the models, the data layers and processing methods were held constant so that variations in the results were due to differences in model design. Three models were used SCAM Soil Contaminatio n Attenuation Model Zaporozec 1985 , WISM Wisconsin Susceptibility Model Schmidt 1987 , and DRASTIC Aller et al. 1985 . All are parameter scor ing weighting models that use several data layers, although not all models use all of the layers, nor do they consistently weight the layers. Maps derived from the three models for a site in St. Croix County, Wiscon sin are displayed in Figure 1. The basic problem is that even when using a common data set processed in the same way, the results are vastly differ ent. It is important to reiterate that the models' developers state that the models are not directly comparab le. Regardless, it is likely that the maps represent the same thing to the lay person and many decision makers. Statistical analysis of the relationships between the models further corroborate the visual disparities Table 1. . Correlation coefficients demonstrate little or no relationship in the SCA. 1 DRASTIC pair and very weak relationships in DRASTIC WISM and WISM SCAM pairs. The comparison map and coefficients of areal correspondences between the models indicate complete divergence over 22 percent of the area, with similar ratings between two of the three models over 70 percent of the area, and complete correspondence over 7 percent of the area. The coeffi cient of areal correspondence only indicates agreement or disagreement across the models. Therefore , the models produce conflicting risk ratings, both graphically and statistically. Maps produced from these assessments are often the primary informa tion used by officials for making land use policy decisions concerning groundwater. Often, officials neither have the data nor the knowledge to assess the validity of the models. This has led to the following question Given that groundwater vulnerabilit y models produce different results and, therefore, different maps, how do decision makers respond when confronted with conflicting cartographic information? Number 29, Winter 1998 39 DRASTIC l "k J'.,1, 111111 'DP. '"Tll , n f 1 llc1 t11 H1g,h n1 lc1 111 l 1 l WISM R1,k 1'u1t 1111,J '. '!' I H1. J. f l11dn ll H1.1 h l 1 Figure 1. Gro1111d1mfa V11 m rnbility Model Results SCAM P."k Pule n111l hl '. lj H . h d1 1 l1 1111 H1.' .!.li ludl 11le l u COMPARISON .. . i! ' , ' I ' "'..___.. . ' . . . r " i ' .... " 1J111 1.op111ulnu ,. ,it ii11 It n1 tip ' . 11t11" ti , l'ai111l In asking this question, an attempt is made to understand how visual data impact decisions, especially where multiple views of the data present conflicting information . In order to examine the impact that conflicting visual information has on planning decisions regarding groundwater protection, the study was de signed using the three conflicting maps seen earlier in Figure L While the models are not explicitly designed for site level assessments, they serve a function in screening sites for further consideration . In all cases, a site level assessment would need to be conducted prior to a final decision. Thirteen local decision makers participated in the map use exercise. These people .Vere chosen because they represent typical users of vulner ability maps in planning based decisions. The participants included five planners, three local government board members, two geologists, one civil engineer, one developer , and one farmer. Only three of the thirteen METHODS "While the models are not explicitly designed for site level assessments, they serve a function in screening sites for further consideration." 40 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Correlation Coefficients standardized unclassed scores Coefficient of Areal Correspondence classed scores SCAM DRASTIC 0.049 None 22.4 DRASTIC WISM 0.279 Partial 70.3 WISM SCAM 0.311 Complete 7.3 Ta 1 c 1. Rclatio11slrips 1efwee11 Gro1md1mfer V11l11erabilit y Models "The exercise had the partici pants identify potential sites for rouses using the information on grou 11dwater vulnerability for each of three different maps." "Participants were then asked to describe row they would resolzie the i11formation conflicts betwee11 the maps, considering that tire maps represented the same area. participants had significant experience with groundwater vulnerabilit y models and mapping. The exercise had the participants identify potential sites for houses using the information on groundwater vulnerability for each of three different maps. Each map was divided into four quadrants. Participants were asked to assume that all sites were equally accessible within each quadrant and that each site would have its own well and septic system. For each map, they also rated the vulnerability for each quadrant, chose the best location for a house in each quadrant, and selected the overall best quadrant for a house. A sample test page is reproduced in Figure 2. From these questions, information on perceived relative vulnerability levels and locational behavior were obtained. Such site selection problems are realistic and critical tasks for planners. The three specific task questions were 1 Based on this map, rate the average risk for groundwater contami nation in each of the four quadrants using the scales below. 2 Based on the information on the map above, mark the best location for a house in each quadrant with a dot. Assume that all locations are equally accessible and that each house will have its own well and septic system. 3 Examine the map above. Which quadrant contains the most desirable location for a house? You must choose one. ln designing the test pages, the three maps were simply labeled as Areas 1, 2, and 3. Since the vulnerability maps had extremely low correla tion coefficients 0.049 0.311 , the maps were not rotated or flipped to mask that the maps represented the same area. In general, as the correla tion coefficient of the map pairs falls below 0.84, it becomes increasingly more difficult for subject to judge similarity Olson 1972 . None of the participants noticed that the maps represented the same area during the exercise. This slight deception was later revealed to the participants and formed the basis for a discussion of how to resolve information conflicts between the maps. Once the participants answered the three sets of questions, they were given a description of how the different maps were constructed using a GIS. At this point, the fact that the three maps represented the same area was revealed. Participants were then asked to describe how they would resolve the information conflicts between the maps, considering that the maps represented the same area. After answering this question individu ally, participants were divided into two focus groups for a discussion of the models and an opportunity to examine how information conflicts might be resolved in a group setting. Each of the authors facilitated one of the groups and transcribed the discussion. After the focus groups finished, each participant responded to a questionnaire on their previous experi Number 29, Winter 1998 41 Groundwater Vulnerability Area 3 Ri11k Potcnti l High Moderate High Moder Le Low Low O 300 Feet Q n 1 Build 011 11 i. map. r1ta tl'le aver 011 rl k fer groundw919 r oonlarrvn.tion "'Heil of th1 tour ,.,.,,., 1 11 Q 11 e c i aft below. Otcle the number that mo t closely rnatdlec your tallt Q .... ,.... ..,. Quadrant 2 ,.. . , ' I ... Quadr31ant 1 Aver aoe lll ll Aa oHlllertt , 2 a Ave,. ltle AA Mtll e11t 1 1 a s 1 Quadrant 3 ,., .... ,,. ... ..,7 Quadrant 4 .. .... "' ..,7 Qu115tion 2 fl.Med 01111'111 il'll'Drmatlon on die map abava, mark Ille bMt rocat1o11 lor a ho..a l'I eac quadrant wih a dot. Auume at all loe abor. are eqmJly aeo11 1bl Mid lh at Nd home will ! we b CNlro well and WJ h 1i 191TI. Oue tion 3 arNM the map ai ove. Whrel'I qu adrw COl talM the IN t des.uable location !or a l'loU e? You !Nllil .moo.a Ol e. 1 2 3 4 Figure 2. Tc t l'asefor WISM M,1dclfrom Map Use Exercise ences with vulnerability maps and models and their uses in landuse planning. Analysis of ariance A JOV A was used to test the relationship between the vulnerability ratings for each quadrant. The results indicated that the participants' a erage vulnerability ratings in all but one quadrant '"'ere significantly different p less than .OS between most map pairs. See Table 2. Quadrant three SW was the only quadrant where the ratings were similar between all maps. Overall vulnerability ratings for each map were compared using A.t OV A, and all map pair comparisons were significantly different p less than .01 . Therefore , the participant s' perceived vulnerabil ity ratings vvere significant ly different. This indicates that the maps exhibit a potential for information conflicts. Quadrant four SE was judged by the participants to be the most suitable location for a house on all of the maps. This quadrant also re ceived the lowest average risk ratings for each of the maps. This indicates that even though there were significant differences in vulnerability ratings for this quadrant , it was still the best general area for a house. In this RESULTS "The results indicated that the participants' average vulner ability ratings in all but one quadrant were significantly different p less than .05 betiveen most map pairs." 42 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 DISCUSSION "Some participants suggested throwing out the maps completely and using 'common sense.'" Quadrant 1 Quadrant2 SCAM DRASTIC SCAM DRASTIC DRASTIC WISM DRASTIC WI SM WISM SCAM WISM SCAM"' Quadrant 3 Qoadrant4 SCAM DRASTIC SCAM DRASTIC DRASTIC WI SM DRASTIC WISM WI SM SCAN WI SM SCAM "'SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT at p .05 Table 2. V11 11aal1i 1t,11 Rati11gs 1ct11 ee11 Map Pairs by Q11adrn11t ANOVAi context, the information content was reasonably stable. In other words, the maps produced the same result for the determination of the best quadrant for a house although the maps were different. The best location for a house within each quadrant varied by map Figure 3. . It is not surprising that in areas where locational choices are constrained, more clustered patterns occur. SCAM and WISM models provided high constraints, and therefore the participants ' responses tended to cluster. These clusters occurred in different locations in all quadrants except quadrant three SW . The DRASTIC model, in contrast, had fewer constraints on location. The patterns produced were dispersed in the northern quadrants , and as constraints became more severe, the patterns became more clustered in the southern quadrants . The southern clusters occurred in different locations on all three maps. Differences in both vulnerability ratings and locational preferences indi cate that different results would be obtained depending on which map was used for analysis. The problem, as stated, is what happens when people are confronted with two or more maps that present contradictory results. It is important to remember that the results produced with the different models were based upon the same data set, although the models incorporated the data in different ways. To examine how people deal with conflicting cartographic information, the following question was asked Given that these results were developed from the same data set, for the same area, and yield conflicting information , describe how you would deal with this in the context of making planning decisions? After writing a response to this question on their own, each participant joined a focus group for a discussion. This allowed an examination of both individual and group decision making strategies and to ask additiona l follow up questions concerning the use of the maps and their utility. After examining the individual responses , a number of similarities and differences in participants ' comments were noted. Responses varied by how important maps were to the decision making process. Some partici pants suggested throwing out the maps completely and using 'common sense.' Others defined the problem as political, referring to administrative and zoning codes that dictate acceptab le procedures and regulations and require minimal map use for arriving at a decision. In the middle, some participants suggested using a combination of the models or using the models as 'advisory to decision making.' Finally, some participants suggested 'improving existing models or developing new models' that would provide more valid maps. Number 29, Winter 1998 43 The importance of the map and spatial approaches to the problem varied greatly. These approaches could be characterized by a continuum from aspatial to spatial Figure 4. with less reliance on the map defining the aspatial end and more reliance on the map defining the spatial end of the continuum. The implicit assumptio n at the aspatial end of the con tinuum is that the map is unnecessary. Common sense, unreflecti ve opinions, or rules of thumb fall at the aspatial end of the continuum, because they often do not explicitly consider local ecological conditions. For example, "everyone knows that you don't put your well next to your septic system." While initially these may appear to be spatial approaches, these approaches do not involve the evaluation of specific site characteris tics. In certain circumstances, for example, in areas with deep wells, the 'rule' may have little practical meaning. The issue is that one does not need map based information to apply the rule. The implicit assumption at the spatial end of the continuum is that a map is needed, but that the existing models need to be refined. The question arises, why do people view the utility of maps and models with such divergence? There are many different possible explana tions. One could be that the participants were drawn from a varied pool of expertise, and individual differences in background , education, training, experience, and decision making roles could account for these variations. Another possibility is that participants placed different interpretations on the context of the problem. However, responses from individuals with similar backgrounds ranged across the full continuum. For example, the planners made comments that ranged across the continuum in spite of their similarities in training and decision makin g roles. Therefore , it appears that individual cognitive style, irrespectiv e of training or context, may be a more significant factor in explaining how people deal with conflicting cartographic information. In the broader context of cognitive psychology and human behavior, Jung 1983, 129 also questioned how individuals could interpret the same material so differently? Jung concluded that people belonged to different psychological types and these types accounted for variations in individual decision making processes. The basis of Jung's typology consists of four dichotomous variables introversion extra version, intuition I sensation, thinking feeling, and judging perceiving. These variables combine to form 16 different psychological types. Jung 1983, 132 stated that there are never pure types and that all individua ls exhibit varying degrees of all characteristics. A type is defined by the predominant mode of behavior. Readers may be more familiar with the extension of this work on personal ity types by Myers and Briggs Myers 1962 . Keirsey and Bates 1984, 23 note that Jung proposed all of the dimen sions, but never fully developed the judging I perceiving dimension . Jung emphasized introversion extraversion as the predominant distinction between psychologic al types. Introverts emphasize the inner world of concepts and ideas, and extraverts emphasize the outer world of people and things Myers 1980, 7 . The other psychological functions describe how people perceive, come to conclusions , and come to closure. Intuition and sensing, according to Jung 1983, 144 , are "the irrational functions" and relate to the perception of events or potential events. Intuition in volves indirect perception , and sensing involves direct perception through the five senses sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste . Thinking and feeling are "the rational functions " and relate to how conclusions are made. Thinking involves the use of logical processes aimed at an impersonal finding, and feeling involves processes based on subjective values Myers 1980, 3 . The final dimension, judging and perceiving, involves preferences DRASTIC O Hou e locwon DRASTIC SCAM D Howe. Loution SCAM WISM Fig11re 3. l'v1ost Desirable Locatio11 for a House by Map. Aspatial polltlcal process Spatial combine Fig11re 4. Co11ti11u11111 of approaches for ha11d i11g c01 f icli11g cartograpl1ic approaches. 44 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Aspatial Spatial Fix11r, 5. C1 11ti111111111 of p. _11cl10!.1girnl l!f '''" a11d pnf111 dl'Ci, 1,111 111nki11s. "Spatial and aspatial are defined solely on the basis of whether or not a map is necessary to the decisio11 111aki11g process." " 11 group decisions, people cannot ass11111e that eueryone is percei'ui ng and evaluating tile data in tile same way and therefore will arriz1e at the same decision. " for degrees of closure. Judging types prefer closure using the available data, and perceiving types defer closure desiring more data. Returning to the idea of how participants made decisions using the maps, it is possible to arrange several of the psychological functions along a continuum from aspatial to spatial Figure 5. . This provides a potential framework for explaining the variations in approaches to conflicting information on maps. Common sense approaches align with intuition and feeling and generally appear to be aspatial, whereas modeling approaches align with sensation and thinking and appear to be spatial. Spatial and aspatial are defined solely on the basis of whether or not a map is neces sary to the decision making process. Furthermore, intuitive types prefer approaches that are figurative and employ approximations in contrast, sensing types prefer approaches that are literal and employ detailed facts Kroeger 1992, 33 . Common sense involves "unreflective opinions" G. C. Merriam 1987, 266 , rather than careful evaluation of facts. As noted earlier, since common sense does not rely explicitly on site specific criteria, the aspatial end of the continuum is defined as being largely intuitive. In contrast, the spatial end involves the use of site specific criteria for evalua tion and, therefore, is largely based on sensing. It is important to note that these psychological dimensions describe a continuum of approaches to decision making behavior, and each is valid in its own right. These define predominant decision making preferences and it is possible for people to shift style in some circumstances. The predominant type of introversion I extra version and the functions of perceiving judging do not appear to play a role in this context. Variations in psychological types influence group dynamics in decision making. The interaction of contrasting types has the potential for increas ing both understanding and misunderstanding. This became apparent in our focus group discussions where participants expressed a number of contrasting opinions about the utility and necessity of the maps. In group decisions, people cannot assume that everyone is perceiving and evaluat ing the data in the same way and therefore will arrive at the same decision. In the focus groups, we observed contrasts in psychological types decision makers exhibited both aspatial and spatial behaviors as described above. The fact that the maps presented conflicting information may have rein forced each participant's preexisting tendencies toward a psychological type. Those that tended toward the aspatial end of the continuum readily discounted the validity of the maps and their importance to decision making. In contrast, those that tended toward the spatial end of the continuum looked for refinements to the models in order to improve the maps. In this situation , the discussions were congenial, since no decision had to be made. However, the dynamics in groups that need to make a decision are often less congenial. At the outset of this project, the application of the Jungian typology was not anticipated, however, this typology provides a way to frame the problem and provide some explanation. Contrasts in styles have a poten tial for helping to understand how people process and manage conflicting information in a cartographic context. In contexts where multiple decision makers interact to solve a particular problem, in this case policy concern ing groundwater vulnerability, diverse decision making styles come into play. The likely result of varied decision making styles is multiple out comes that are internally consistent to the individual decision makers be cause each person frames the problem context according to her his psy chological type. Diverse results should serve as a reminder to those who are cartographically oriented that not all users approach maps with the same enthusiasm. This alludes to an issue of how we approach conflicting Number 29, Winter 1998 45 information as a cartographic problem the problem is not necessarily a question of 'how maps work', but instead, 'how people work with maps'. In this paper, results were presented from an experiment that investigated how decision makers respond to conflicting cartographic information using a series of conflicting groundwater vulnerability maps for one area. Thirteen local decision makers participated in the experiment, and input Vas collected from them as to how they would deal with information conflicts in a planning situation. The decision makers then discussed the maps and information conflicts in a group setting to examine how group dynamics might influence the decision making process. From this, a continuum of strategies was developed that ranged from the aspatial approaches , e.g., discard the maps and use common sense, to spatial approaches , e.g., build a new spatial model that "works." When the research was initiated, it was viewed as a problem of carto graphic visual information processing and it was anticipated that the participants would discuss methods for representing conflicting informa tion. Hmvever, the issue turned very quickly away from the original maps to one of how decisions are made using or, in some cases, not using the maps. This allowed the development of a continuum of approaches to the problem and a series of questions as to 'vhy such diverse results vere obtained. It became apparent that very different internal processes were employed by the participants to evaluate the map data. The divergence of responses suggested that something as fundamental as Jung's psychologi cal types may play a role in how people evaluate map data. The results from this study present several avenues for further research. The first a enue deals with how to best represent information conflicts and uncertainty between multiple maps. With growing reliance on GIS modeling in environmental decision making and issues of inter model stability, methods need to be developed to spatially represent agreement and disagreement between models. MacEachren's 1994 suggestions provide a starting point for such an investigation. The second avenue deals with the role of individual preferences in decision making and the influence of psychological type on how people work with maps. It is apparent from this research that there are diverse ways in which individu als perceive and understand information and that this may impact the decisions which the ultimate! make. Finallv, a third avenue deals with how groups mal .e d.ecisions u ing maps. The' dynamics of individuals and groups in the decision making process are markedly different, and little cartographic research has addressed this interaction. The role and importance of multiple representations in visualizing spatial problems is well documented , however, there needs to be a concern with the quality of the information that these multiple , iews present. The potential for conflicting information in cartographic displays becomes quite high when multiple data layers are combined in GIS models. The fact that the s 1me data layers may produce markedly different maps 'hen combined in different combinations or through different models is coming to be a real concern for those who deal with environme ntal data and decision making. This concern becomes paramount in situations where different representations may confuse or obscure understanding rather than illuminate it. We thank the three anonymou s re, iewers for their comments and requests for clarification. Ve also thank Dr. Rik Seefeldt from the Department of Psychology at the L"niversity of Wisconsin River Falls for assistance with SUYfMARY AND CON Cl USIOl 'S "However, the issue turned ztery quickly away from the original maps to 011e of how decisio11s are made using or, i11 some cases, 11ot using the 111aps." "The role and i111porta11ce of multiple represe11tatio11s in visualizing spatial problems is well docu111e11ted, however, there 11eeds to be a co11cem with the quality of the i11for111atio11 that these multiple viezus present." ACKt O 'LEDGMENTS 46 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 REFERENCES issues pertaining to psychological typology. All omissions and interpreta tions however remain our responsibility. Aller, L., T. Bennett, J. Lehr, and R. Petty. 1985. DRASTIC A Standardized System for Evaluating Ground Water Pollution Potential Using Hydrogeologic Settings. Ada, OK U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Armijo, R. et al. 1981 Epidemiology of gastric cancer in Chile II Nitrate exposures and stomach cancer frequency. lntemational journal of Epidemiol ogy 10 1 57 62. Canter, L. 1987. Nitrates and pesticide s in groundwater An analysis of a computer based literature search. in D. Fairchild ed. Gro1111d Water Quality a11d Agricultural Practices. Chelsea, MI Lewis Publishers. DiBiase, D. 1990. Visualization in the earth sciences. Earth and Mineral Scie11ces, Bulletin of the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, PSU 59 2 13 18. G. C. Merriam Company. 1987. Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. Springfield , MA G. C. Merriam Company. Geraghty and Miller, Inc. and ICF, Inc. 1990. A Review of Methods for Assessi11g the Sensitivity of Aquifers to Pesticide Contamination. Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Harley, B. 1989. Deconstructing the map. Cartographica 27 2 1 23. Jung, C. 1983. The Essential f1111g selected a11d introduced by Anthony Storr. New York, NY MJF Books. Keirsey, D. and M. Bates. 1984. Please U11dersta11d Me Character and Tempera ment Types. 5th Edition. Del Mar, CA Prometheus Nemesis Book Com pany. Kroeger, 0. 1992. Type Talk at Work. New York, NY Delacorte Press. Lee, L. and E. Nielsen. 1987. The extent and costs of groundwater contami nation by agriculture. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 42 243 248. Lloyd, R. and T. Steinke. 1976. The decisionmaking process for judging the similarity of choropleth maps. The American Cartographer 3 2 177 184. Lukens, J. 1987. Landmar k perspecti ve the legacy of well water methemo globinemia. AMA The Journal of the American Medical Associatio11 257 20 2793 2795. Lusch, D., C. Rader, L. Barrett, and N. Rader. 1992. Aquifer Vulnernbi ihJ to Surface Co11ta111i11ation in Michiga11, Map and Descriptive Information. East Lansing, MI Michigan State University , Center for Remote Sensing. Map MacEachren, A. 1994. Some Truth with Maps A Pri111er on Symbolizntion and Design. Washington, DC Association of American Geographers. MacEachren, A. and J. Ganter. 1990. A pattern identification approach to cartograph ic visualization . Cartogrnphica 27 2 64 81. Number 29, Winter 1998 47 Merchant, J. 1994. GIS based groundwater pollution hazard assessment A critical review of the DRASTIC model. Pl10togrn111111etric E11gi11eeri11g and R 'lllOtc Sc11si11g 60 9 pp. 1117 1127. Monmonier, M. 1974. Measures of pattern complexity for choroplethic maps. The A111erica11 Cartographer 1 2 159 169. Monmonier, M. 1991. Ethics and map design Six strategies for confronting the traditional one map solution. Cartographic Perspectives 10 3 8. Muehrcke, P. 1990. Cartography and geographic information systems. Cartography amt Geographic Infor111atio11 Systems 17 1 7 15. Myers, I. 1962. The Myers Briggs Type llldicator. Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press. Myers, I. 1980. Gifts Differing. Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press. Olson, J. 1972. The effects of class interval systems on choropleth map correlation. Tlte Ca11adia11 Cartographer 9 44 49 122 131. Peterson, M. 1985. Evaluating a map's image. The A111erica11 Cartographer 12 1 41 55. Rader, C. and J. Janke 1995. Methods for assessing groundwater vulner ability in St. Croix County, Wisconsin. Wisconsin Geograp hical Society Annual Meeting, River Falls, Wisconsin. Schmidt, R. 1987. Groundwater Co11ta111i11a tio11 Susceptibility in Wisconsin Wisc011si11 's Gro1111d1mter Ma11age111e11 t Plan Report No. 5. Madison, WI Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Scragg, R. et al. 1982. Birth defects and household water supply Epidemio logical studies in the Mount Gambier region of South Australia. Medical foumal of Australia 2 12 577 579. Tufte, E. 1990. Emiisioning Infor111atio11. Cheshire, Connecticut Graphics Press. Wood, D. 1992. The Power of Maps. New York, NY Guilford Press. Zaporozec, A. Ed. 1985. Groundwater Protection Principles and Alternati7.'es for Rock Co1111ty, Wisconsin. Madison, WI Wisconsin Geological and Natu ral History Survey. 48 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 I reviews The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. The Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences, Dartmouth Medi cal School. John E. Wennberg , Prin cipal Investigator and Series Editor, Megan McAndrew Cooper, Editor. Chicago, Illinois American Hospi tal Publishing, Inc., 1996. Pp. xiv 230, maps, graphs, tables. 75 soft cover, academicdiscount, without diskettes S350 hardcover, with diskettes Sl,300 hardcover, with diskettes, CD ROM, and all nine re gional supplements . ISBN 1 556 18 163 2, soft cover. Ordering informat ion AHA Services, Inc., P.O. Box 92683, Chicago IL 60675 2683, 1 800 AHA 2626 . Re11iewed by Russell S. Kirby, Ph.D., M.S., F.A.C.E., Associate Professor Depnrt111e11t of 0 1stetrics n11d Gy11ecology Mi u1n11kee Cli11icn Cn111p11s, UW Mndiso11 Medical Sc 100 Every now and again a revolution ary approach to the processing and presentation of information ap pears, changing forever the way in which the subject matter is viewed and understood. The publication of The Dnrt111011th Atlas of Hen th Cnrc may be an example of one of these events. In this slender volume this reviewer examined the soft cover academic ersion of the atlas hard CO 'er and electronic versions are also available , the project team has assembled numerous maps and vi gnettes representing statistical analyses of literally tens of millions of health care services, patients, and clinicians in a highly readable and interpretable format. The atlas portrays the current macro scale spatial structure of the American health care delivery system and dis plays patterns of disease preva lence and treatment modalities for numerous health conditions and diseases. lt may take a generation of medical geographers, epidemiolo gists and health services research ers to pursue all of the research questions, hypotheses and intuitive hunches derived from this single publication. Most of the maps in the atlas dis play variations in health related phenomena across hospital referral regions. These functional regions are aggregates of 3,436 hospital ser vice areas which were defined through an intensive analysis of Medicare hospitalization data for 1992 93 in which five digit ZIP codes were grouped into contigu ous regions based on patterns of hospital use. A total of 306 hospital referral regions were identified through examining where residents of each hospital service area were referred for major card iovascu la r surgery and neurosurgery. A series of detail maps show the locations of each hospital referral region in rela tion to major centers of health care p. 25 35 . Ha 'ing defined the hos pital referral regions, successive sections of the atlas provide detail ed maps of acute care hospital re sources and expenditures hospital capacity, utilization , and outcomes health manpm.ver physicians di agnosis and surgical treatment of common medical conditions. There are also sections on benchmarking, tabulations of much of the data presented in the detailed maps, and the strategies and meth ods used to develop the information and maps in the atlas. Most of the maps consist of two facing pages, with a standard layout that in cludes a national 1 ap .vith five in sets San Francisco , Chicago, De troit, Washington Baltimore , and New York vi th the distribution of values for the phenomenon of inter est grouped roughly into quintiles. Each discussion also includes a distribution graph showing the phenomenon of interest as the verti cal axis and each hospital referral region represented as a filled circle of equal size. These graphs show not only the degree of dispersion, but also whether variation is due to relatively few outliers or is widely distributed across the nation. The text accompanying each map fo cuses on which hospital referral re gions had high and low rates, but provides little interpretation of the data displayed. Some context is provided elsewhere. For example, prior to the section on spatial pat terns in the diagnosis and surgical treatmentofcommonmedicalcon ditions, there is a discussion of "which surgical rate is right?" and the issues of underscrvic e and the role of scientific uncertainty in the delivery of health care services. While Tlie Dnrt111011t 1 A tins of Hen th Cnre is an impressive achieveme nt, it is not without its shortcomings. Foremost among these is the failure to include a bib liography would link the methods used to the literature on health ser vices research and medical geogra phy, and would connect each sta tistical map to its empirica l re search base. To aid in interpreting the maps ith data across hospital referral regions, a map showing populations in each region would have been useful. Most of the dis ease and treatment data are derived from the Medicare population , which is defined primarily by age and almost universal participation. Researchers interested in patterns of health care use among individu als under the age of 65 will be dis appointed in the minor omission of maps for more than 80 of the population. There are no maps showing patterns of injury or dis ability, sur 'ival follm.ving specific treatments, obstetrical procedures and outcomes, or spatial variation in propensity to use inpatient facili ties among the non elderly. This omission is perhaps understand able, given the lack of standardized, nationwide population based data b,1scs on hospital services other than Medicare, yet there are some datasets national vital statistics Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 49 data, for example which, although not whollv satisfactorv for analvses at this scaie, could supply data' vi th vhich to address some of these issues. The section on benchmarking, while interesting, is far too abbreviated to be of use to those interested in applying these techniques to the planning or evaluation of regionill health care delivervsvstems. These criticisms notwithstand ing, this atlas is a monumental ac complishment which all practitio ners of health services research or medical geography will wish to ex amine. Geography and map librar ies should definitelv add this vol ume to their holdings, and will find the hardcover edition consulted fre quently. Spatial data repositories should consider acquiring the CD ROMs Vi th the detailed data used to generate the maps and graphics included in the atlas. This reviewer looks forward to the linkage of spatial analyses of variiltions in health care deliverv to decision making by health care or gani,a1tions, insurers, policy mak ers and health services researchers, and to expanded and updated fu ture editions of this iltlas. Mapping an Empire The Geo graphical Construction of British India, 1765 1843. Matthew H. Edney. Chicago CniversityofChi cago Press, 1997. Pp. xv 340, maps, references , biographical notes, and index. 35.00 hardback ISB l 0 226 18487 0 . Reuiewcd by Dr. W. Elizabeth f epso11 Dcpnrf11H'11t of Geosrnplly U11il1crsif!f of Cnl tim1in nt Los A11seles Enlightenment ideals, brute colo nial realities, and practical bureau cratic negotiations collide in Mat thew Ednev' s historv of carto graphic pr ctice du ing late eigh teenth and early nineteenth century British imperial expansion in South Asia. Considering recent studies on the duplicitous role of geography in European colonialism , it is not sur prising that Matthew Edney has closely investigated cartography in British India. His contribution to the study of geography and empire is to present a sophisticated expla nation of mapmaking in British In dia as a cultural, political, and his torical product. Rather than a ubiq uitous tool for empire, mapmaking in the divided bureaucratic context was confined, often contradictor y, and incomplete. The author's nar rative brilliantly synthesizes text and context map and motive to tell a story of how the British map ping of India was contingent on a variety of competing practical and ideological interests. Throughout this book, Edney deploys a rigorous theoretical analysis on voluminous archival material to illustrate the central theme in Mnppi11s n11 E111pire A tension between Enlightenment epistemologica l ideals of obsen a tion and notions of representation were manifested through the actual practices of survey and mapmaking "on the spot." Moreover, this carto graphic project based on intersect ing ideologies of colonialism and contradictorv ideals of science was mediated through colonial institu tional negotiation and historical contingencies. The first section of Mappi11g n11 Empire, Edney draws from many empirical examples to outline how overarching Enlightenment ideas and cultural expectations of "sci ence" influenced colonial practices of mapmaking in the early years of British colonialism in South Asia. For example, the reports by "peripa tetic officers" surveying the Indian landscape , such as Colin Mackenzie's Sun ey of Mysore 1800 1801 and Francis Buchanan's Bengal survey 1807 1814 , attempted to achieve the ideal of taking a complete inven tory. Survey of town locations, land resources, and rivers, descriptions of language and religion, social and economic information, mineralogi cal, botanical and zoological inven tories were predicated on the notion that the surveyor could achieve a complete scientific understanding of the landscape through this im plicitly cartographic and visual framework. According to Edney, ob servation and reason provided a "powerful rhetoric of vision, em piricism, and presence" that but tressed the scientific authority of imperial cartography p.75 . This cultural and ideological expecta tion that science must be a rational process of compilation set the ground " 'Ork for the construction of what Edney names as the geo graphical "archive." Th.is "archive" includes representations, images, narratives, and maps assembled and ordered that underpinned the larger cultural process of colonial ism. Scientific expectation also framed the conceptua l scope, pro cess and practice of colonial mapmaking. Edney illustrates how the British understood vision and observation in the scientific pro cess. He argues that scientific inves tigation was an exercise of power, explains how the picturesque land scape aesthetic fashioned images of South Asia, and outlines how an implicit cartograph ic framework structure d geograph ical narratives that contributed to the colonial archive. Emphasizing the cultural and scientific influence of the carto graphic perspective on more gen eral imperial information gathering activities , the author observes that "geograph ical observation implic itly construc ts new knowledge based on the spatial and distribu tion of phenomena, in which re spect is firmly rooted in the map and mapmaking, but observat ion itself is part of the larger knowledge discourses constituted by texts, maps, images, and statistical cen suses" p. 46 . Through his broad overview of British cartographic history in South Asia, Edney sup 50 cartogmpliic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 ports the notion that knowledge is intimately linked to power, but he grounds this perspective on de tailed discussion based on the spe cifics of British colonialism in South Asia. Edney connects these scientific ideals to imperial realities and moves his analysis from how geo graphical perspectives fashioned images of South Asia to how sur veys and cartography were used to "discipline" the Indian landscape. Statistical, astronomical, and route surveys formed the backbone of co lonial cartographic knowledge. However, for eighteenth century co lonial administrators, the potential of the survey was only realized when it vas incorporated into a larger knowledge base, reconciled with multiple geograp hical sources, and systematically reconstituted in a single encyclope dic cartographic archive. Yet, according to scientific expectations, the information was obtained only through the inchoate and imperfect vision of the sur veyor. For the cartographic project to progress scientifically, the sur veyors needed to find new, more comprehensive and "rational" methods of mapping the empire. What Edney emphasizes is that technological change to triangula tion concommitantly transformed the practices of cartography in Brit ish India. The innovative trigono metrical survey provided the "tech nological fix" to the acknowledged imperfect, indirect, often ambiguous route surveys, descriptive topogra phies, and astronometrical observa tions. Triangulation created a "rig orously structured space" sup ported by more accurately con trolled measurements and provided the framework for more detailed surveys to be integrated at large scales. Trigonometrical surveys or dered cartographic space and disci plined the Indian landscape to Eu ropean science. This new expensive and time consum ing cartographic method reduced the Indian land scape to a uniformed mathematical framework and set in motion a geo graphical certitude that fostered, ironically, practical material and intellectual anarchy that became characteristic of British mapmaking in India. The scientific and cultural ideals of cartograph y also met financial limits, logistical constraints, institu tional inertia, and stochastic colo nial realities. Conditions of the co lonial administration circum scribed all efforts to coherently map India. The divided information managem ent system, patronage, hi erarchical decision makin g appara tus, separation between govern mental departments, lack of re sources, and expanding need for geographical information all con tributed to a chaotic practice of mapmaking. Moreover, these struc tural constraints exacerbated the tension between surveyors and Company cartographers in London offices who eventually compiled the multifarious surveys into the single vision of India. This permitted a "mini hierarchy" of cartographic expertise to form. As Edney writes, "The surveyors worked at the boundary between the uppermost, British portion of the pyramid and the lower foundations staffed by Eurasians and Indians the cartog raphers functioned close to the pin nacle of the pyramid, collecting data and disseminating maps downward as necessary" p. 162 . Edney focuses on the Madras surveys 1790 1810 to best illus trate the contingent character of British cartography as both duplici tous in advancing British claims on indigenous resources and divided in its practice. Lack of administra tive unity was the prevailing char acteristic in the mapping of Ma dras. Different motives and visions of how to make an accurate and comprehensive map in accordance with scientific and cultural expecta tions characterized this era of mapmaking. otable illustrations of this cartographic anarchy are Edney's discussion of Colin Mackenzie's attempt at a systematic topographical survey, William Lambton' s trigonometrical survey of India's eastern coast, and the in ability of the government to create a single cartographi c institution to coordinate a comprehensive survey of southern India. These enlighten ing examples illustrate how, through detailed archival research, one can empirically link internal administrative conflicts and finan cial constraints of cartographic practice to contested ideas in carto graphic practice. Edney shatters the image of the ubiquitous colonial state unified in purpose, perspec tive, and practice. With sound em pirical evidence, he shows that cul tural expectation of "science" and social realties within the British co lonial system had a profound effect on the construction of geographical knowledge. The territorial expansion of Brit ish rule during the early nine teenth century demanded a unified cartographic project to deal with in creased governmental responsibili ties. As a result, the British insti tuted the Great Trigonometr ical Survey to support the publication of the Atlas of India. In the final chap ters of Mappi11g an Empire, Edney writes a comprehensive history of this attempt to map "all of British India." The Atlas of l11dia was in tended to unify disparate topo graphical surveys based on a com mon "geomet rical groundwork" of the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India GTS . This framework that underpinned the Atlas of J11din "held the promise of a perfect geo graphical panopticon" to combine both geodetic science and genera 1 geography, thus reducing geo graphical data to a uniform refer ence p. 319 . The complexity of this section is found within the empiri cal examples of how the unified im age of India developed historically within the changing requireme nts of colonial administration to rule their newly acquired territory. Edney's discussion on the Great Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 51 Trigonometrical Survey and its in stitutional development provides the reader with fundamental under standing how the character of Brit ish cartography in India was con tingent on cost and, most of a IL practical and ideological compro mise. Archival synthesis and lucid narrative of the ideological, histori cal, and technological processes of British mapmaking sets a new em pirical and theoretical standard for both the history of cartography and South Asian colonial studies. Map ping an Empire takes the analysis of maps and pm ver to a higher level of empirical precision and detail. He details cartographic practices and explains these Ni thin the context of colonial demand and constraint with the accuracy of a historian and precision of a cartographer. The cartographic specialist will ap preciate how Edney brilliantly inte grates a profound understanding of the practical process of mapmaking with voluminous archival material. His ability to expose important practical details of colonial map making from the problems with manpower, expense, and time lim its reinforces the broader theme that cartography is a highly con tested process within divided colo nial administration and limited re sources. In Mappi11g an E111pire, these logistical constraints are su perimposed on the cultural expecta tions of science to show how the very fabric of geographical knowl edge the map is socially and po litically constituted. For the colonial historian or cultural geographer in terested in questions of empire and geography, Edney demystifies the colonial state in the process of im perial expansion and brings into focus the role of individuals and co lonial institutions that have pro found effects on how the British proceeded to map India. Mapping a11 Empire is both a monumental contribution to the history of British colonialism and a necessary addi tion to the libraries of geographers interested in the history of geo graphical thought. Atlas of Oregon Wildlife Distribu tion, Habitat, and Natural History. Blair Csuti, A. Jon Kimerling, Tho mas A. O'Neil, Margaret M. Shaughnessy, Eleanor P. Gaines, and Manuela M. P. Huso. Corvallis Oregon State University Press, 1997. 512 pages, 670 maps includ ing full color map insert, 442 illus trations. Hardbound, 39.95. ISBN 0 87071 395 7 Reviewed by a111es E. Meacham lnfoGraphics Lab, Depart111e11t of Geography U11 iversi ty of Orego11 Euge11e, Oregon 97405 1251 The Atlas o_f Oregon Wildlife Distri bution, Habitat, and Natural History is a comprehensive publication fea turing information on Oregon's 426 native terrestrial vertebrate species that breed in Oregon and 15 intro duced species. In the heart of the at las there are sections covering Am phibians, Reptiles, Breeding Birds, and Mammals, with a page dedi cated to nearly each of the 441 spe cies. Each page contains a two color, 1 4,300,000 scale, range map with supporting textual informa tion on Global Range, Habitat, Re production, Food Habits, Ecology, and other relevant facts. Reference to Order, Family, State and Federal Status, Global and State Rank and Species Length are also listed. Each page contains a finely created line drawing of the featured animal. The maps display the probable ranges where each wildlife species could be found, using shaded relief and county boundaries as spatial refer ence. Csuti states," The maps pre sented here serve as a guide to habi tats and general distribution of each species." The breadth and depth of the information on wildlife presented in this atlas is evidence of a major collaborative effort. Many organizations are listed in the ac knowledgments. Thekeycontribut ing agencies include the National Biological Service, Oregon Depart ment offish and Wildlife ODFW , U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, and the Geosciences De partment at Oregon State Univer sity. The Atlas is well organized with an extensive Introduction describ ing Oregon's wildlife and the meth ods used in compiling the range in formation. This section also in cludes a description of each of the 30 identified wildlife habitats of Or egon. Reference maps displaying the major transportation network, cities, and counties are conve niently located just before the spe cies range maps. The atlas contains a glossary, an extensive reference section, a though index, and three appendices I Checklist of Terres trial Breeding Vertebrates, II Checklist of Wintering Birds, and Ill Winter Bird Distribution Maps. The process used for the creation of most of the range maps started with the creation of a vegetation cover map derived from Landsat image interpretation. These vegeta tion cover types were then clustered into wildlife habitats based on habitation by similar groups of spe cies. A full color 1 750,000 scale Or egon Wildlife Habitat Map insert displays the habitat types and the Figure 1. Great Blue Heron 52 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 'egetation CO 'er boundaries. This mapping effort was part of the Or egon Wildlife Habitat Gap analysis project. The habitat types were then overlaid with geograp hic units of county, physiographic division, and a network of . 4 l equal sized Environmental Monitoring and As sessment Program E vtAP hexa gons covering the state. The geo graphic units contained informa tion on presence or absence of the species based on biological studies, museum records, and historical ob servations dating back to the jour nals of Lewis and Clark 180 1 1806 . This overlay process pro 'ided resultant range maps that were then reviewed by biologists, and whose input was used in carto graphic fine tuning of the final range maps. figun 2 .. 'ortha11 l il't'r Oller Because of the characteristics of the species habitat or the a ailable data, several methodologies were de, eloped to crea tc selected species maps by either modifying the ranges derived from the modeling method mentioned '1bovc or by us ing an entirely different approach. Some of the resultant maps from the modeling received C1dditional atten tion by including major hydro graphic features for species, like the northern ri, er otter, that are closely associated with water, , ith the h drograph printed in '1 higher ' liue ink. Other species such as the mallard duck or western pond turtle have a verv discontinuous h lbitat which is denoted with a stippled area pattern for the range symbology. For marine birds a not to scale buffer off the coast I ine was gencrnted to displ ly their h lbitat. Two introduced species the big Fis11rc 3. Wc ft m Po11d Turtle horn sheep and wild turkey are based on maps directly from the ODFW using no GIS modeling. Other species ranges were modified with elevation data, for example, Townsend's mole was eliminated from the Coast Range. Some of the rare species are represented as point symbols plotted at known lo calities, the solitary sandpiper has one location. The mule deer and black tailed deer are the onlv two subspecies that were mapp d in the Atlas. The authors handled this problem by using two different val ues of ink, darker for east of the Cascades Range mule deer and lighter for west of the Cascades Range black tailed deer . The authors of this atlas truly need to be congratulated on successfully publishing in an easy to access and easy to use format a tremendous amount of geographic information system data on a subject of great interest to the Oregon public. In the introduction, Csuti touches on this basic function of the atlas, "While the information gathered for GAP Analysis is maintained as digital data in a geograp hic information system, this atlas provides a larger audience 1,vith access to current knowledgcabou tOregon'swild life." The OSU Press is already gearing up for a second printing, attesting to the popularity of the subject matter and the quick acceptance of the Atlas. The lc1yout and design of the pages is clean and easy to read. The use of teal colored ink for the title and subtitle makes navigating through each page uncomplicated. The complementary use of range maps, species drawings, and de scriptive text of micro habitat con ditions on a single page to commu nicate probable places where a spe cies could be found, work very well together. The species drawings re ally help bring to life the atlas pages. With a little, or for some a lot of, imagination a reader can close their eyes and actually see a belted kingfisher perched on a branch over the quick moving upper Des chutes River, watching and waiting for its next meal, or possibly a west ern pond turtle basking in the sun on a mud bank above a small pond in the Willamette Valley. Interesting but less inspiring than the drawing and range map of the western pond turtle is the tie the atlas designers make between the atlas pages and the large format Wildlife Habitat insert map. Stating which habitat type specifically is related to each species would have made a stronger connection. Even though the data represented on the insert map is the basis for most of the range maps in the atlas, its pub lication with the Atlas appears to be an afterthough t. Unlike the maps on the Atlas pages, the insert map could be characteriL ed as a GIS analysis product, produced on a medium resolution inkjet plotter. The 1 750,000 map design is lack ing in reference information, only displaying the county boundaries in addition to the habitat and veg etation types. This map could have been a great addition in helping meet one of the purposes the au thors state "They the maps can direct you to areas where field stud ies can determine if a species has found the right combination of habitat elements that enable it to es tablish and maintain a popula tion." Having little or no spatial ref erences diminishes its effective use as a location tool. Base GIS themes of major transportation , populated places and hydrography and eleva tion including shaded relief are Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 53 readily a ailable from the Oregon StateSer 'ice Center forGISand could ha 'e been added as a subtle background to help with location. As mentioned above there were actually several methods of compi lation for the range maps. The need for a legend on each map to help clarify these different compilation methods would have been an aid in understanding the meaning of the different symbologies used. For ex ample, the difference in the point symbols used in the solitary sand piper location from a scientific re port and the smooth general boundaries used for the big horn sheep ODFW non modeled range in comparison to the 'erv detailed range boundaries gener ted by the GIS modeling for the pronghorn are all very different in appearance but there is no legend to clarify the dif ferences. By studying the introduc tory text, an explanation of the , ariation in symbology becomes clearer. I feel there is a need to point out a minor issue in the citation regard ing the first delineation of the physiographic di visions of Oregon. The author writes that" The physi ographic provinces of Oregon were first delineated by Franklin and Dyrness 1973 ... ".Further search ing reveals that Franklin and Dyrness Vcgctntio11 of Orego11 a11d Va 1i11gto11 1969 cite Baldwin 1964 and Baldwin in Geology of Orcgo11 1964 cites Dicken's Orcgo11 GeogrnpliJt ''. .. The geology is dis cussed regionally following physi ographic diYisions outlined by Dicken 1955 ... "I hope future edi tions address this point. Beyond the few weak points just con?red the atlas is a great success. This atlas can be held up high as an e .ample to many cartographers contemplating assembling a state Vi Id life atlas. In a broader context, this atlas serves GIS professionals as an excellent example of making accessible to a large audience a complex GIS database that was originally generated for a special ized research and planning project. The citizens of Oregon are 'ery lucky to be the recipient of this com prehensive book. This atlas is an educationa l tool that could lead to a greater awareness and sensitivity among Oregon's human popula tion of the other inhabitants in their state. Note To view the range map of the northern river otter you can go to the website I I bufo.geo.orst.edu I brc temp and open 111 ottrnap.g f. It is also possible to obtain a copy of the map image through the ftp site bufo.geo.orst.edu , and log on as anonymous. Change directories to pub, and "get" either the com pressed tiff format files, nrottmap.zip for PC users, or nrottmap.tif.gz for U ' JIX users. I cartographic techniques GIS Data Made Manageable for Cartographic Production Lo11is Cross I If Florida Rcsourn.?s 1rl'iro11111e11tal A11alysis Cotter Florida Stnte U11iversity C220U U11iPersity Center Tallalinssee, FL 32306 2641 850 6.J.J 7361 cross 111a iler fsu .ed 11 Background The widespread adoption of Geo graphic Information Systems GIS technology by government agencies and the private sector has made 'ast quantities of digital data readily available to cartographers. Initially, the high cost of hardware and software, Im... to medium qual ity graphic output, and limited data sets made GIS less attractive to car tographer s. The practice of scan ning and tracing output from GIS plots or importing vector line work into graphics programs were the primary options offered to trans form GIS data into a computer for mat for the production of high qual ity map products . Most cartography labs adopted the use of graphic arts applications such as Adobe Illus trator or . 1acromedia Freehand' as digital tools for map production. Even though these software pack ages were fully capable of import ing the points, lines, and polygons from the GIS, these programs could not take ad vantage of the useful at tribute informat ion that is main tained in the GIS database. At the JACIS XVI annual meet ing in San Antonio, many attendees were introduced to Avenza Soft ware, Inc.'s 1APub lisher through a workshop. The 1.APublisher software de 'elope rs addressed the issue of maintaining the 'aluable attribute data and manipulation power of a GIS within Freehand or Illustrator. 1APub lisher version 2.1incorporated38 filters designed to import 'ector and raster data with complete attribute tables intact for several major mapping software file formats ESRI Arc View shape, ESRI ARC I INFO generate, Maplnfo mid mif, USGSDLGandSDTS, AutoCAD DXF and geo referenced TIFF and JPEG. In addition to basic import capabilities, MA Publisher enabled the user to change the na tive projection of the imported fi Jes and create supplementary graphic databases. In April of 1995, the Florida Re sources Environmental Analysis Center FREAC began the second Water Resources Atlas tf Florida WRAFJ. The editors and cartogra phers found that most of the data previously submitted by the au thors via hard copy maps and tables were now maintained in ex tensive GIS data sets. MA Publisher performed beyond expectation when addressing these new data formats. All GIS points, lines, and polygons were imported with their accompanying geographic accu racy and attribute tables without error. However, some obstacles be 54 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 yond MAPublisher's control were discovered while importing GIS data. Often the data were far too de tailed for use within the atlas. The level of precision and number of points originally created in the GIS caused difficulty when importing files. Freehand Ts internal limit of 32,000 points, for example, restrict ed larger ARC I INFO coverages from being imported. The coastline files often required considerable simplification as the base maps in the WRAF were much more general ized. MAPublisherenabled queries to be performed separating data into useful groups. Attribute tables were created or edited within Free hand without having to edit in an external spreadsheet or database. Once the points, lines, and poly gons were imported, Free hand's simplify Xtrns!Cleanup!S.implifi . .. routine was applied to remove un necessary points. The A111ou n t 0.25 was realized as the optimal level of simplification, eliminating the most points while maintaining path shape. MAPublisher's func tionality provided a means of streamlining the large GIS data set and making final maps more attrac tive and accurate. The follmving example illus trates how APublisher assisted in the construction of a graphic for the WRAF. The production was done using a 200 MHz Pentium Pro workstation "vi th 64MB RAM run ning Microsoft Windows NYE 4.0 opera ting system software, ESRI Arc View' 3.0a, Macromedia Free hand 7.02, and A venza MA Pub lisher 2.1 application programs. Method Note all kevboard shortcuts are shown for the Windows I PC OS. for Mac OS use simply substitute the Command key for the Control key Ctrl . For this example, three ARC INFO export files .eOO were ac quired from the South Florida Wa ter Management District's plan ning GIS division for a combined map. The files included a south Florida coastline sf_shoreline , 1996 water quality data by hydro Iogic basin complete _wq96 and point locations of hazardous waste sites hazard FIGURE 1 . Once imported into Arc View, the coverages were converted to shape Figure 1. Ar Virn Dis11la.11 files. It is good practice to keep the component parts of the shapefile .shp, .shx, and .dbf together as MAPublisher's built in routines search for them when importing. Importing data through MAPublisher into Freehand was lluite straightforward. The import menu Xtms!MAP11blisher 1111p ort ... offers the options in logical pull down menus FIGURE 2 . In addi tion to file format and feature type, the user must specify scale and page location for the element that is being imported. Within the pull down fields the interface offers con venient browsing capabilities to lo cate files. In order to maximize the image, the default scale can be se lected and the resulting image will fill the current page. for visual pur poses, this was found most useful in the WRAF, as the graphics were to be re scaled to standard basemaps. To begin map construction , the shapefile of south Florida's coast MAPublisher I mporl l AutoCC..D DXF Maplnfo mid mif USGS DLG USGS SOTS Scaling 1 to J MapAnchor X r Y r Set J 1 Defaults Page Anchor X Y Figure 2. A. IAP11 1 isl1cr Import Me1111 r.'" Line Area Select Angle Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 55 line was imported first for registra tion purposes and the establish ment of default values FIGURE3 . A search button complements the filename field of the menu making it F1x111 r 3. lmpMtcd Sliap,filc unnecessary to commit the "8 dot 3" GIS filenames to memory. It is ef ficient to have each layer projected to the same coordina te system. Ho vever, re projection of the data is possible using MAPublisher's projection editor Ktras I MAPub lisher!Projectio11 Editor ... . Pull down menus give access to 119 dif ferent projections and 42 ellipsoids contained in the filter FIGURE 4 . This feature was not used because the files in the sample were all pro jected to state plane coordinates. Default values were chosen for the scale, page and map anchor fea tures so the data would be bound to the current page size. MAPublisher creates and labels the new layer the filename of the import by default. This can be modified, but it was found that for file management pur poses, the default was preferred. For the waste site layer, the shnpefile format and paint feature type were specified. Once a file has been im ported, the scale in which it was brought in becomes an option from the pull down field. Selecting Same as sf_sl10reline commits the succes sive layers to the scale of that layer. This step is repeated until all of the shapefiles have been imported. It is recommended that all of the files be imported before any manipulation takes place. Premature resizing of an image or individual layer can result in inaccuracy. MAPublisher Projection Editor i Input Parameters Projection Projection E soict False Easting False Northing Central Meridian Central Paralet Custom Elpsoid Figure 4. i'v!AP11l1 1sher Pn1iccticm Editor Mc1111 Parallels With the three shapefiles im ported, it was determin ed that the individual types of waste sites and water quality values for the final map needed to be extracted. When the attribute tables of the imported shape files were examined, legend categories were established. The waste site coverage included three types of facilities National Priority List Superfund , state funded, and landfills. Water quality was desig nated as either good, fair, poor or unknown. NlAPublisher'squery features Xtms I MAP Select by At tribute ... enable the userto create selections using SQL type logic statements FIGURES . Because this was the first query for the layer, lllitinl Selectio11 ... was chosen. AJ Fig11re 5. Attribute Selectio11 Me1111 though the user may enter an ex pression directly, pull down fields simplify the task of creating an ex pression by using the attributes at tached to the imported file. Once the C11rre11t Expression included the necessary equation, INSERT was chosen transferring the formula to the recessed "expression area." Clicking OK completed the opera tion and returned the user to the document with the specified items selected FIGURE 6 . For map construction , these lected elements can be modified for the cartographic presentation. It was found that cloning and moving the selection to a new layer allowed the user to keep the original im ported file unaltered for further que ries and created a buffer for unfore seen error FIGURE 7 . Once the map was completed, the original layer was deleted. In addition to the 56 cartographic perspecti ves Number 29, Winter 1998 _,._, Io,9w , .. P' ... .. ........ .. t'd , ...,,_ ' ..... ju Jit fo f' !M" llillBx llllJl'. f f1g11n' 6. Text Elements Sl'ic "ft'd .. i . . .,,.. . ...... _'!. llf' ...... " i _ ...... .... tl f ' '"" , !!!.IBIZ' I ll!llF ,..,,,_,,u llf 1. . , J Figure 7. Ct m erkd Pn 1 Slrnpc, above technique, the efficient MAP Lcge11d feature can separate ele ments while assigning legend infor mation and color based on at tributes. MAPublisher imports GIS lines directly as vector line work how ever, point symbols are imported as text plus signs. Freehand 7 can eas ily change the text to path shapes if these steps are followed Select all of the text Ctr A and convert to paths Ctr Shift P . Select one of the converted path shapes and copy it to the clipboard Ctr CJ. From the f.dit menu select i11d A11d Replace, then choose Graphics ... Cir Alt E . The Attril111te should be set to Path Shape and C 1a11ge 11 shou Id be set to Docu111c11t. Clicking E.astc 111 under Fro111 inserts the con Figure 8. Find and Replace f1g11re 9 Co111pleted Import ...... ! . ,,. ...... ...... ,_ .. ,,._ ....... ..a. 1."' . .... r! ' t Oi t ,_' ...... . . r .L ' . .... ' .... _... l ' "Q' "'!I K 1 .. ..i verted plus sign shape into the white box. Return to the document leaving the i11d A11d Replace menu open by clicking anywhere in the document window. Create a path shape a closed path circle polygon was used for this example on a new layer and copy it to the clip board. Return to the Eind And Re place menu and E.aste 111 the path shape for the To field. Clicking on Qiangeexecutes the replacement FIGURE 8 . Note any unlocked layer co11tai11i11g the element to be cha11ged will be affected. The registration point for these e e111e11ts is different i11 Free hand a11d Illustrator. 111 Freehand, it is the upper left corner, while Illustrator uses the lower left corner . The above steps were repeated for both imported coverages resu !t ing in eight layers of discrete data FIGURE 9 . Once satisfied with the import, polygons were filled, line weights were changed and all of the layers grouped in preparation for refit to the atlas basemap. Due to the close fit of the imported layers to Water Quality and Hazardous Waste Sites watEf Quality ouni.nolflln 0P oor , Air Good Type of Site L.1ndfill SU1 funded tbbl nal Pr1onty Ltsl Sup nund .YJ 50MI Fis111 , 0. Finni lvfnp L sl I,.. 0 p tl o ns .... a . "' a MAP...ti she1 Import .... a Guides Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 57 the standard basemap for the WRAF, it was milnually resized. Title, scale and legend were added to the map to com plcte the graphic FIGURE 10 . Conclusion While MAPublis herdid not directly affect the final look of the published maps in the atlas, it proved to be in valuable in converting the large quantities of data received for the preparation of maps into a useable form. The final maps are primaril y the result of cartograph ic design de cisions and the functions of the graphics software, but MAPub lishcr contributed significantl y in several .vays. First, the final printed maps are much more accurate in the geographic location of features due to the use of detailed GIS data. Second, the ability to take data sets from multiple sources and re project them to a common projec tion allows the cartograp her to combine Javers and create custom maps. Finally, the timeand cost savings from using this alternative method were esscntia I to the completion of the project in a timely manner. In many instances, the al ternative 1. ould have been to take printed output from theGIS, manu ally trace the line work in a more generalized form, scan the image, and retrace the line work in Free hand. The utilization of MAPublisher for this project and the techniques that were developed that led to the production of final printed color maps has enhanced the ability of FREAC cartographers to produce high quality maps for publication that are more accurate and more cost effective. More information about MAPublis hcr can be found on the website bliJ2. .il w vw.avenza.com. Note Full screc1111crsicms of the graph ics cn11 liefo1111d nt 128.186.177.25 nrt iclc.'11111! map library ulletin board The Louisiana State University Cartographic Information Center 0'111 M. A11derso11 Mnp Librnrin11 mrd Director Cnrtogrnphic l11for111ntio11 Ce11ter Dept. of Geogrnp lry A11tlrropology Lo11isin11a Stale U11ivcrsity 504 388 6247 jm1ders ls11t1111.s11cc.ls11.ed 11 Ir ttp llwww.cadgis.ls11.ed 11 cic! The Louisiana State Universi ty Car tographic Information Center CIC is a significant research resource in the Gulf South region. The Center's collection containing over 280,000 maps and 81,000 aerial photo graphs makes it the largest map col lection in Louisiana and ranks it among the larger academic map li braries in the Cnited States. In ad dition to the many maps and aerial photographs, the collection in cludes several regionally unique cartographic resources which are available to the University commu nity, state and local agencies, busi ness and private patrons, as well as patrons from around the world. The Cartographic Informati on Cen ter is funded and staffed by the De partmentofGeography An thropology and is administratively and physically separate from the LSU Libraries. The CIC collection is comprised of materials in two cate gories distinguished by ownership. The majority of the material in the collection was acquired by LSU geoscience departments and is now owned by the Department of Ge ography Anthropology. Addi tionally, the CIC houses materials deposited by the Army Mapping Service and the Federal Depository Library Program. Although the Cartographic Infor mation Center dates its founding to 1960, the collection is the product of both a broad scope of current schol arship and the rich seventy year history of geoscience research at LSU. The DepartmentofGeography Anthropology collection reflects the department's teaching and re search focus by concentrating on acquiring maps depicting historical and current Louisiana, the Gulf South, Latin America with particu lar emphasis on Mexico , East Asia, and Europe. The specific research subjects supported by the collection include historical, cultural, eco nomic and physical geograp hy, an thropology, coastal and fluvial geo morphology, and geology. The re gionally unique materials in the De partment collection include the largest collection of original Louisi ana Sanborn Fire Insurance maps outside of Washington, DC the most complete set of historic U .5. Coast Geodetic Survey hydro graphic and topographic charts of the Louisiana Gulf Coast housed in the region, copies of historic maps depicting Louisiana, and historic aerial photographs of Louisiana dating from the 1930s to the 1980s. Among the unique materials cov ering areas outside of Louisiana is a nearly complete set of original U.S. Geological Survey topographic quadrangle maps printed before 1940. In addition to maps of the United States, the scope of geo science research at LSU O 'er the past seventy years has brought ma terials depicting areas outside of the U.S. to the CIC. One example is a collection of over 3000 large scale 1 50,000 topographic maps of Mexico " hich provides over 96 coverage of the country. In addition to cartographic materials, the CIC houses the Dr. Robert C. West Latin American photograph collection containing over 6,000 black white photographs and the Dr. Robert C. West Slide Collection of over 10,000 slides from around the world. Complementing the material amassed by the geoscience depart ments are the Army Mapping Ser vice depository material from the 58 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 1950s and 1960s and the current Government Printing Office Federal Depository Library Program FDLP . The current FDPL material is located in the CIC as provided in the Separate Housing Agreement with the Regional Depository Li brary located in the LSU main li brary. The combination of the Army Mapping Service maps and the current FDLP arrivals provides world wide medium scale topo graphic map coverage as well as small to large scale map coverage of the United States. The Cartographic Information Center operates as a closed stacks library. The staff consists of one full time professional assisted by a 1 Full Time Equivalent student staff who retrieve materials in response to patron requests. In calendar year 1997 the staff served 723 walk in patrons who requested the retrieval of a total of 1120 maps and 658 aerial photographs. Other patron services include locating and rec ommending digital data sources, geographic names research, and suggesting map vendors for private purchases. These service requests are received from walk in patrons as well as via telephone , fax, mail, and e mail. In addition to providing daily patron service, the Cartographic In formation Center staff is working to overcome problems common to many map libraries such as inad equate space, the need for retro spective cataloging, and preserva tion. As with other map libraries, the most pressing problem is inad equate space. The recently imple mented weeding program designed to remove duplicate out of scope materials has barely kept pace with normal acquisitions. I 'aturally, once the weeding is completed , nor mal acquisitions viii soon fill the recently available space. Addition ally, the acquisition of several large research collections is pending un til additional space is available. It is hoped that additional space will be acquired in the next three years. In general, access to collection materials is primarily provided through index maps for series, while other local finding aides are consulted for individual maps. In addition, the FDLP materials are piece level cataloged in the LSU Li braries LOLA online catalog avail able at www.lib.lsu.edu da tabases Iola.html. The Department of Geography Anthropology col lection materials are classified and filed using a locally developed sys tem. An effort is underway to create electronic databases to improve ac cess to the departmental material. Completed databases are available locally for the Dr. Robert C. West Latin American Photograph Collec tion, as well as for the map hold ings depicting Louisiana, vlexico, and the West Indies. The work on databases for the Dr. Robert C. West Slide Collection, and for maps de picting the United States is under vay. The pre 1940 U.S. Geological Survey topographic quadrangle map indexes were completed in 1997. Because the material in the De partment of Geography Anthro pology collection results from the long history of LSC geoscience teaching and research, these materi als are often old, fragile, and require preservation. In the past, original maps as well as copies of historic maps were acquired. As a result, map materials in the collection range from acetate based film nega tives to fragile newsprint. Addition ally, the bulk of the collection is housed in acidic containers. A re cently completed major preserva tion project involved the transfer of historic U.S. Coast Geodetic Sur vey chart images from decomposing acetate film negatives to stable mylar. Currently , an ongoing pres ervation effort is underway to pre vent daily wear on fragile maps by removing the maps from the general collection, rehousing them in pH buffered containers, and placing them in less trafficked drawers. In addition to the daily map li brary duties of patron service and processing acquisitions, and the long term rehousing, retrospective cataloging, and preservation efforts, the CIC staff is promoting aware ness of the Cartographic Informa tion Center's collection through tours, class presentations, and the World Wide Web. The Center's web site, www.cndgis.lsu .edrilcicl, was established in November 1995 to provide an overview of the hold ings. Although the majority of the CIC holdings are not in an online catalog, the web site does list the CIC's significant special collections and map series. When the map da tabase for a specific area is comple ted, a paragraph describing the map holdings is added to the web site. In addition to the descriptive paragraphs and map series listings, a complete list of Louisiana historic aerial photographic coverage by parish and year is provided. A com panion list of the CIC's holdings of aerial photomosaics by county and year depicting states other than Louisiana is also available. Finally, in order to illustrate the aerial pho tograph collection's scope, six rep resentative aerial photos taken of the LSU campus from the 1930s to the 1980s are on the web site. The Cartographic Information Center is located in room313 Howe Russell Geoscience Complex, LSU Campus , Baton Rouge, LA 70803 and is open to the public from8 00 a.m. to4 30 p.m. week days except University holidays. The University of Iowa's Map Collection Mary Mel 11 roy Gouem 111en t Pu 11 icntio11s Dcpart111e11t and Map Co lectio11 U11 iversi ty of Imm Libraries Iowa City, IA 52242 1420 319 335 6247 or 319 335 5926 FAX 319 335 5900 e mail 111ary 111ci11 roy uiowa.cd11 Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 59 The University of Iowa's Map Col lection is the largest map collection in Iowa, with more than 176,000 sheet maps, as well as copies of Sanborn fire insurance maps for more than 1,000 Iowa cities from the 1870's through the 1930's, either on paper or microfiche Iowa county atlases for the period from the 1870's to the l 930's on micro film over 600 Iowa plat books and more than 100,000 aerial photos of Iowa counties, for various vears since the 19 lO's. Although stron gest in Iowa and Mid'vvestern mate rials, the collection is international in scope and ubject coverage is broad, excluding only geologic maps, vhich are collected at the Ge ology Library. Until ,1pproximate ly three years ago, there were no electronic carto graphic products in the Map Col lection. When l joined the collection in 1995 as half time Map Librarian, I brought with me an interest in desk top mapping capabilities. I had worked with federal docu ments for manv 'ears and knew of the wealth of r u eric data in the document s department. I had also received training in 1992 on ArcView as part of the ARL GIS Literacy Project, and had been us ing a stand alone copy of Arc View in the Government Publications De partment. Thus, the Map Collection began acquiring cast off CD ROM d ri vcs from other 1 ibrary depart ments and some fairly simple CD ROM mapping products e.g., Map Expert, Pro,imity . The Map Collec tion still did not have anv hard ware to run higher end mapping programs , until a series of events changed our situation for the better. First, the libr H ' was "wired" in the spring of 1997, enabling Map Collection machines to access the outside world. Then with the assis tance of supportive library adminis trators, we utiliLed library develop ment funds, money from the library 92s collection development general fund, some of my own map collec tion funds, plus" donated CPU from another library on campus, and were able to purchase very ad equate hardwar e to run Arc View 3. At that point, Arc View was relo cated from documents to the Map Collection to run on the new ma chine. Lastly, the Map Collection obtained funding in late 1997 for two more desktop mapping work stations through funds designated by the University's Office of the Pro 'OSt for instructional technology enhancements. Thus, by the end of 1998, the Map Collection will be running desktop mapping software on three networked machines in the Map Collection 92s reading room. Because of the network ed environ ment, the machines vill be linked to each other and to a color laser printer also purchased with the technology enhancement funding. We can also explore additiona l li brary access for ArcView, since we have a library site license for ArcView. I have consciously used the phrase "desktop mapping ," rather than GIS in this article. At this point, the goal of placing these ma chines and software in the Map Collection is to give patrons access to higher end mapping tools to which they otherwise Vould not have had access. The University of Iowa has several true GIS labor to ries on campus, located in aca demic departments, where students enrolled in genernl education in troductory classes can utilize vari ous GIS software products. When many of these students finish tak ing these types of courses in geogra phy, etc., they will not have access to the departmental labs and to electronic mapping capabilities in general. After speaking with profes sors, students, and other librarian s at ALA and elsewhere, it seemed more useful to focus this beginning service in the Map Collection to ward those students and faculty whose main needs can be met by mapping programs such as Arc View and Maptitude. As you can see, the path to get ting the three machines was not clear cut, the results came to us in phases, but the focus audience was always the same. The administra tors at the University Libraries are very supportive of having desktop mapping capabilities in the Map Collection. We had earlier made larger requests to university offices for machinery and software for this service and had always been re jected. Thus, the piece meal ap proach was begun, and it paid off. !' ow time must be devoted to writ ing policies, creating templates and pre designed maps, hunting for tu torials, grappling with levels of ser vice, finding staff time for this new service, and even figuring out how these large machines will fit into the space available. But had we not been willing to pre define our audi ence and to advance our cause gradually, I believe we would still be waiting for our first desktop mapping station in the Map Collec tion. _ NACISn 1997 98 NACIS OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS NACIS OFFICERS President Patricia Gilmartin Department of Geography University of South Carolina Columbia, SC 29208 803 777 2989 fax 803 777 4972 e mail gilmartin pat sc.edu Term ex pi res October 98 Vice President Cynthia Brewer Department of Geography Pennsylvania State Uni 'ersity University Park, PA 16802 5011 81 1 863 5072 fax 814 863 7943 email cbrewer essc.ps u.edu Term expires October 98 60 cartographic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 Secretary JamesO. !linton Map Library University of Tennessee 15 Hoskins Knoxville , TN 37996 4066 423 97 l 4315 fax .. 23 974 0560 email jim minton utk.edu Term expires October 99 Treasurer Sona Andrews Univ. of Wisconsin Milwaukee P.O. Box 413 Milwaukee , WI 53201 ll 1 229 6057 fax 414 229 2 181 email sona csd.uwm.edu Term expires October98 Past President Michael Peterson Dept. of Geography Geology University of Nebraska Omaha Omaha, NE 68182 402 554 .. 805 fax 102 55 l 3518 email geolib cwis.unomaha.edu Term expires October98 NACIS EXECUTIVE OFFICERS Christopher Baruth A GS Collection P.O. Box 399 Milwaukee, WI 53201 800 558 8993 fax 11 1 229 3624 FAX l14 229 3624 email cmb csd.uwm.edu Sona Andrews L'niv. of Wisconsin Milwaukee P.O. Box 413 !lilwaukee , WI 53201 .. 14 229 6057 fax 414 229 2 181 email sona csd.uwm.edu Susan Peschel AGS Collection, P.O. Box 399 Milwaukee, WI 53201 800 558 8993 fax 114 229 362 l email sqp gml.lib.uwm.edu NACIS BOARD Of DIRECTORS Gregory H. Chu 10 99 Dept. of Geog. and Earth Science Univ. of Wisconsin La Crosse LaCrosse, 'NI 54601 608 785 6675 fa" 608 785 8332 email chu mail.uwlax.edu Jeremy Crampton 10 99 Department of Geography George Mason University Fairfax, VA 22030 4444 703 993 1217 email jcrampto gmu.edu Valerie Krejcie 10 I 98 4020 Kirk St. Skokie, IL 60076 847 677 1881 email t krejcie nwu.edu James E. Meacham 10 99 Department of Geography 1251 L'niversity of Oregon Eugene, OR 97403 1251 541 346 4870 fax 541 346 2067 jmeacham oregon.uoregon.edu Elizabeth elson 10 99 DepartmentofGeography San Diego State University San Diego, CA 92182 4.. 93 619 594 8560 email nelson16 mail.sdsu.edu Thomas Patterson 10 98 lational Park Service Harpers Ferry Center P.O. Box 50, Publications Harpers Ferry, WV 25425 304 535 6020 FAX 304 535 6144 email t_patterson nps.gov Joseph Stoll 10 98 Dept. of Geog. Planning University of Akron 306 Carroll Hall Akron, OH 44325 5005 330 972 7621 email joestoll uakron.edu Kathryn Thorne 10 98 Dept. of Geography Geology Belknap Hall Mansfield University Mansfield , PA 16901 717 662 4612 fax 717 662 4612 email kthorne mnsfld.edu NACIS Board Meeting January 10, 1998 Lexington, KY Present Andrews , Baruth, Brewer, Chu, Crampton, Gilmartin, Krejcie, Meacham, Minton, Nelson, Patterson, Peschel, Peterson, Stoll, and Thorne. Michael Peterson recognized Pat Gilmartin as the newly elected President of ACIS and turned over the meeting to her. Gilmartin called the Board to order and wel comed the newly elected officers Cynthia Brewer Vice President , and James Minton Secretary and new Board members Greg Chu, Elizabeth !' elson, Jim Meacham, and Jeremy Crampton. Continuing Board members are Peterson, Thorne, Patterson, Krejcie, and Stoll. Sona Andrews continues as Treasurer. Gilmartin also thanked Peterson for his hard work as im mediate past President, Craig Remington for his work as Secre tary and the out going Board mem bers for their service Jim Anderson , Barbara Buttenfield, and Glen Pawclski. NACISexecutiveofficers are Sona Andrews, Susan Peschel, and Chris Baruth. Cartographic Perspectives CP Editorial Board reported on the progress of searching for a new editor. They recommended dis banding the three year rotation. A guest editor would be responsible for one issue per year. Mike Peterson volunteered his name as editor for a threevearterm effective Fall Winter1998. With Peterson absent, the Board moved, seconded, and discussed the appointment. The vote was unanimous in sup port of Peterson to assume the role of Editor. FurtherCP Ne.,,vs Jim Ackerman and Jeremy Crampton have already volunteered tobefutureguestedi tors. Joanne Perry will assume role of Book Review Editor with assis tance. Several names were sug Number 29, Winter 1998 cartograpllic perspectives 61 gested for CP Editorial Board. Buttenfield offered to send flyers to encourage contributions to CP. Mo tion was made, seconded, dis cussed and appron?d by the Board. It was noted that CP is getting very close to the page limits for con sideration of moving to Perfect Binding. This move Nould cost an additional 120.00 for every addi tional four pages. Meeting Site For Year 2000 An open discussion was held proposing se, eral potential sites for I ACIS 2000. Members are encour aged to propose host institutions and sites and offer them to the Board for consideration. Submitting sites should consider a host depart ment such as geology, geography, or GIS lab. Other issues to consider are hotel and air fare costs. Cities suggested were Las Vegas, Cleve land, Omaha, Kansas City, Port land or Eugene, OR, San Diego, KnoX 'ille, and Saratoga Springs, l Y. Membership Committee Issue was rabed concerning "regu lar student," "subscription," and "affiliate" memberships. Other is sues relating to membership The establishment of a Bulletin Board electronic , mailings to GIS, carto special interest groups such as URJSA . WEB Committee Jeremy Crampto n offered tochaira Web ' 'W type Committee.Such a site would cost about 525 per month. Crampto n and the Board will explore this issue further. Baruth offered to work '"' ith the Committee and the possibility of moving UWM's "LeMdo" to the Web. Parts of the pages could in clude NACISorgani1ation offic ers, annual meetings, parts of er. The Boa rd wi 11 re assess at the spring meeting. Spring Board Meeting Peterson noted that the experience with a telephone conference call for the Board meeting did not work well. Gilmartin asked for suggested meeting sites. Atlanta, Chicago, Las Vegas, and Da I las were offered. Gilmartin will determine best site and notify members in early 1998. New Business Rowles mentioned an idea of giving plaques to students who assist in the annual conference. She also noted that AAG meets March 24th 29th, 1998. Sub111itted, f i111 MillfOll NACISSccretnry fro111 tlic N ACIS Prcside11t co11ti1111edfro111pnge1 board. In reality, Mike had been an obvious choice all along, but it just took a little time to convince him. Mike has done an outstanding job for a number of years as chair of the editorial board, and I have no doubt that he will continue his exemplary work as editor. I would like to thank Mike for accepting this re sponsibility and to remind every one else that we can make his life as editor easier by sending him more good manuscripts to consider for publication in CP. The next reason I can enjoy serv ing as president of JACIS is the tre mendous job done by our E"ecutive Officers at CW Milwaukee Chris Baruth, Sona Andrews, and Susan Peschel. ACIS members may get tired of hearing this same refrain from every president, but the reason we sound like a broken record is be cause these three make the presi dent's job such a ... veil, ... a sure. They maintain our records and mailing lists, collect dues, man age many of the arrangements for the annual conference, and handle innumerable other details. The con tinuity and e' perience provided by Chris, Sona, and Susan form a strong infrastructure for IACJS which is invaluable to its officers, board members, and membership. After a well attended and infor mative annual meeting in Lexing ton last fall, we are looking forward to getting together again this year in Milwaukee October 7 10 . Dr. Cvnthia Brewer is Vice President a d Program Chair this year. If you have questions or suggestions about the annual conference, you can reach Cindy at cbrewer essc.psu.edu or at the De partment of Geography, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802 . The usual Call for Papers and details of the meeting will be mailed out later this spring, but it is not too early to be thinking about attending and participating in the meeting. This year's annual meeting will be preceded by a full day sympo sium on the topic of "Maps and Minds A History of Cartograp hy in Geography Education." Organized by James R. Ackerman of the Hermon Dunlap Smith Center for the History of Cartography at Chicago's lewberry Library, the symposium will feature si" to eight invited speakers who will examine the de 'elopment and use of maps in Western education and publica tions from the sixteenth through the twentieth centuries. This sympo sium, which has been several years in the planning , constitutes a rare opportunity to reflect on the interac tion between cartographic publica tion and societies' educational pri orities. Look for details in the Call for Papers for the annual meeting and on our website at www.nacis.org. Yes, 1998 is a good year to be president of NACIS, mainly be cause of the admirable support pro vided by current and past officers of the organizat ion. I invite you to join ACIS if you are not already a member , renew your membership if you are late with your dues , and 62 cartograpl1ic perspectives Number 29, Winter 1998 participate if you have been lurk ing in the wings . I can assure you that you will enjoy the results. Pat Grl111nrti11 Presidc11t, NACIS L submissions The editors of Cnrtogrnp 1ic Per pcc ti7.1e. welcome manuscript submis sions. Please follow these guide lines. FEATURED PAPERS Each issue of Cnrtogrnplric Perspl'C tii. es includes featured papers, which are refereed articles report ing original work of interest to NACIS'sdiversemembcrship. Pa pers ranging from theoretical to ap plied topics arc welcome. Prospec ti e authors are encouraged to sub mit manuscripts to the Editor. Pa pers may also be solicited by the Editor from presenters at the an nual meeting and from other sources. Ideas for special issues on a single topic arc also encouraged. Papers should be prepared c'clu sively for publication in CP, with no major portion previously pub lished elsewhere. All contributions will be reviewed by the Editorial Board, whose members will advise the Editor as to vhethcr a manu script ic appropriate for publica tion. Final publication decisions rest with the Editor, who reserves the right to make editorial changes to ensure clarity and consistency of stvle. REVIEWS The Book Review Editor, Joanne M. Perry, will solicit reviews of books and atlases. Publications are to be sent directly to Joanne M. Perry, Map Librarian , The Valley Library 121, Oregon State Universit y, Corvallis, Oregon 97331 4501 or perryj ccmail.orst.edu. Reviews of maps and mapping software will be solicited by the Editor of CP. Pro spective reviewers are invited to contact the Editor directly at geolib unomaha.edu. CARTOGRAPHICT ECHNIQUES Articles that concern all aspects of map design and production are so licited by the Cartographic Tech niques Editor, James E. Yleacham , Director, lnfoGraphics Lab, Depart ment of Geography, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403 1251 or jmeacha m oregon.uoregon.cd u. MAP LIBRARY BULLETIN BOARD The 1ap Library Bulletin Board Editor, Melissa Lamont, solicits re ports on the current status of map libraries. Submission are to be sent directly to Melissa Lamont, Data Li brary, Mclean Laboratory, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , .VHOI Mail Stop 8, Woods Hole, MA 025 13 or mlamont whoi.edu. TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR SUBMISSION Literature cited should conform to the Chicago Manual of Style, 14th ed., University of Chicago Press, Chapter 16, style "B." Examples of the correct citation form appear in the feature articles of this issue. Authors of Featured Papers should submit four printed copies of their manuscript for review directly to Michael Peterson , Editor of Cnrto grnplric Perspectil'es, Department of Geography Geology, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, Ne braska 68182. Manuscripts are re viewed by three referees. The Editor will contact all authors to notify them if their paper has been ac cepted for publication and if revi sions are necessary prior to publi cation. The following technical guidelines should be followed for all accepted manuscripts these guidelines also apply to book, map, and software reviews . Material should be submitted in digital form on 3.5" diskettes. Please send a paper copy along with the disk. Text documents processed with 1acintosh or Windows soft ware, such as WordPerfect or MS Word, are preferred. PostScript graphics generated with Adobe ll 11strntor or Mncromcdin frceHn11d for the Macintosh I Win dows or Corel Draw for Windows computersarepreferred , butge neric PICT or TIFF format graphics files are usually compatib le as well. EPS format graphics should in clude only the graphic with no fig ure caption. Graphics may be sub mitted on disk, placed on an FTP site, or sent to ftpnt.freac.fsu.edu. Manually produced graphics should be no larger than 11by17 inches, designed for scanning at 600 dpi resolution avoid fine grained tint screens . Continuous tone photographs will also be scanned. Text and graphic files should be sent to 1 r. Jam es R. Anderson , Asst. Editor, FREAC, UCC 2200, Florida State University, Tallahas see, FL 32306 2641 850 644 2883 , fax 850 644 7360 email janderso mailer.fsu.edu Special thanks to the following individuals who have made donations to c.artographic Per spectives. Kevin Byrne William Gennetti John Hutchinson E.L. Lanzer Joseph Poracsky David Woodward NEW NACIS WEB SITE www.nacis.org __ Number 29, Winter 1998 cartographic perspectives 63 NACIS membership form North American Cartographic Information Society Sociedad de Informacion Cartografica Norte Americana Name I Nombre Address Direcci6n Organization I Afiliaci6n profesional Your position Posici6n Ca rto graphic interests I In te reses ca rtog ra ficos Professional memberships I Socio de organizaci6n Membership Fees for the Calendar Year Valor de n6mina de socios para el afio Individual Regular 42.00 U.S. E.U. Students I Estudiant es 20.00 U.S. IE. U. Institutional I Miembros institucionales 72.00 U.S. E.U. Make all checks payable to Manden sus cheques a NACIS AGS Collection P.O. Box 399 Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201 Membership fees include subscription to Cartograpltic Perspectives . I FREAC The North American Cartographic Information Society NACIS was founded in 1980 in response to the need for a multidisciplinary organization to facilitate communication in the map information commu nity. Principal objectives of NACIS are to promote communication, coordination, and cooperation among the producers, disseminators, curators, and users of cartographic information to support and coordinate activities with other professional organizations and institutions involved with cartographic information to improve the use of cartographic materials through education and to promote graphicacy to promote and coordinate the acquisition, preservation, and automated retrieval of all types of cartographic material to influence government policy on cartographic information. NACIS is a professional society open to specialists from private, academic, and government organizations throughout North America. The society provides an opportunity for Map Makers, Map Keepers, Map Users, Map Educators, and Map Distributors to exchange ideas, coordinate activities, and improve map materials and map use. Cartographic Perspectives, the organization 's Journal, provides a mechanism to facilitate timely dissemina tion of cartographic information to this diverse constituency. It includes solicited feature articles, synopses of articles appearing in obscure or non cartographic publications, software reviews, news features, reports confer ences, map exhibits, new map series, government policy, new degree pro grams, etc. , and listings of published maps and atlases, new computer software, and software reviews. NONPROFIT ORG. Florida State University Tallahassee , FL 32306 2641 U.S. POSTAGE PAID TALLAHASSEE , FL PERMIT NO. 55